Title: Decoupling Exploration and Policy Optimization: Uncertainty Guided Tree Search for Hard Exploration

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.22273v1

Published Time: Tue, 24 Mar 2026 02:46:25 GMT

Number of Pages: 33

Markdown Content:
# Decoupling Exploration and Policy Optimization: Uncertainty Guided Tree Search for Hard Exploration 

# Zakaria Mhammedi Google Research, NYC 

# mhammedi@google.com 

# James Cohan Google Research, NYC 

# jamesfcohan@google.com 

# March 24, 2026 

Abstract 

The process of discovery requires active exploration—the act of collecting new and informative data. However, efficient autonomous exploration remains a major unsolved problem. The dominant paradigm addresses this challenge by using Reinforcement Learning (RL) to train agents with intrinsic motivation, maximizing a composite objective of extrinsic and intrinsic rewards. We suggest that this approach incurs unnecessary overhead: while policy optimization is necessary for precise task execution, employing such machinery solely to expand state coverage may be inefficient. In this paper, we propose a new paradigm that explicitly separates exploration from exploitation and bypasses RL during the exploration phase. Our method uses a tree-search strategy inspired by the Go-With-The-Winner algorithm, paired with a measure of epistemic uncertainty to systematically drive exploration. By removing the overhead of policy optimization, our approach explores an order of magnitude more efficiently than standard intrinsic motivation baselines on hard Atari benchmarks. Further, we demonstrate that the discovered trajectories can be distilled into deployable policies using existing supervised backward learning algorithms, achieving state-of-the-art scores by a wide margin on Montezuma’s Revenge , Pitfall! , and Venture without relying on domain-specific knowledge. Finally, we demonstrate the generality of our framework in high-dimensional continuous action spaces by solving the MuJoCo Adroit dexterous manipulation and AntMaze tasks in a sparse-reward setting, directly from image observations and without expert demonstrations or offline datasets. To the best of our knowledge, this has not been achieved before. 

# 1 Introduction 

Reinforcement learning (RL) is a cornerstone of modern artificial intelligence, enabling breakthroughs in complex autonomous systems and, more recently, the post-training and alignment of Large Language Models (LLMs) (Mnih et al., 2015; Silver et al., 2017, 2018; Ouyang et al., 2022; Rafailov et al., 2023). However, these successes often rely on rich feedback, such as expert demonstrations in robotics or preference labels in language model alignment (Christiano et al., 2017; Hester et al., 2018; Brohan et al., 2022). In the settings we study, where guidance is scarce, rewards sparse, or the goal is surpassing human performance, learning must go beyond imitation to autonomously generate quality data (Silver et al., 2017; Ecoffet et al., 2021b). This requires active exploration : an algorithmic process that deliberately collects informative experience (Shyam et al., 2019; Sekar et al., 2020; Eysenbach et al., 2018). In the hardest cases, this amounts to “finding a needle in a haystack,” where a single rare trajectory is the key that unlocks learning. In structured settings like two-player games, self-play facilitates exploration (Silver et al., 2017). As the agent improves, it probes the boundary of its current policy, gradually expanding its coverage of relevant strategies. Outside of this self-play regime, driving exploration is significantly harder. Even in simple 2D environments, current methods often fail to explore efficiently without domain engineering; Montezuma’s Revenge and Pitfall! remain standard benchmarks that stress-test systematic exploration (Ecoffet et al., 2019; Badia et al., 2020a,c; Guo et al., 2022). These failures suggest that we still lack a robust understanding of systematic exploration in data-sparse domains. Progress in this area has implications well beyond games; efficient exploration is a prerequisite for discovery in complex scientific domains. 1

> arXiv:2603.22273v1 [cs.LG] 23 Mar 2026

Historically, the primary approach to exploration relies on training agents with intrinsic motivation (Schmid-huber, 1991; Oudeyer et al., 2007; Barto, 2012; Houthooft et al., 2016; Stadie et al., 2016). In this paradigm, the agent is trained to maximize a composite objective consisting of the extrinsic reward and an intrinsic bonus designed to encourage visiting novel states. In high-dimensional spaces, these bonuses typically use proxies for “visitation frequency,” such as the error of Random Network Distillation ( RND ) or the prediction error of a dynamics model (Burda et al., 2018; Pathak et al., 2017, 2019). While accurate uncertainty estimation is crucial, we argue that driving exploration by maximizing these signals via RL incurs unnecessary complexity; iteratively updating a policy to reach novel states is inherently sample-inefficient, as it requires constantly tracking a non-stationary intrinsic reward signal. 

Contributions. 

• We propose a new paradigm for autonomous exploration in sparse-reward settings that bypasses intrinsic-reward policy optimization. Our framework pairs a tree-search strategy, inspired by the Go-With-The-Winner ( GWTW ) algorithm (Aldous and Vazirani, 1994), with epistemic uncertainty (Depeweg et al., 2018) to drive exploration; the approach is modular and agnostic to the specific uncertainty metric. The method relies on the ability to reset the environment to previously visited states in order to redistribute computational effort toward the most promising frontiers. By replacing intrinsic-reward policy optimization with uncertainty-guided tree search, our method discovers high-reward trajectories using an order of magnitude fewer environment interactions than standard intrinsic motivation baselines on hard-exploration benchmarks. 

• We show that supervised backward learning algorithms (e.g., Salimans and Chen. (2018a)) can distill the generated trajectories into robust, high-scoring policies. In particular, we achieve state-of-the-art results by a wide margin on Montezuma’s Revenge , Pitfall! , and Venture when not relying on domain-specific knowledge. 

• We demonstrate the generality of our framework by applying it to high-dimensional continuous action spaces, solving the MuJoCo Adroit dexterous manipulation and AntMaze navigation tasks in a sparse-reward 

setting without relying on expert demonstrations or offline datasets. To the best of our knowledge, this has not been previously achieved. In both cases, the final distilled policies operate directly from image observations, without accessing privileged state information. 

Outline. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the related work and contextualizes our approach within the literature on separating exploration from exploitation and the usage of environment resets. Section 3 formalizes the problem setting and introduces core components, including the uncertainty estimator and the reset mechanism. Section 4 details our uncertainty-driven tree-search algorithm for exploration, Go-With-Uncertainty (GowU ). Section 5 presents implementation details, including a distributed architecture for scalable exploration and the specific instantiations of the uncertainty estimator and particle policies. Finally, Section 6 evaluates the method on hard-exploration Atari games and challenging MuJoCo continuous-control tasks, showing efficient exploration and successful policy distillation across all environments. 

# 2 Related Work 

Efficient exploration remains a central challenge in reinforcement learning. We address this by adopting a paradigm that explicitly separates exploration from exploitation. 

Separating exploration from exploitation. Most deep RL algorithms intertwine exploration and exploitation, attempting to maximize rewards while discovering new states. To drive discovery, these methods typically add an intrinsic exploration bonus to the reward function. These bonuses typically derive from signals like state novelty counts or learned model prediction error (Bellemare et al., 2016; Pathak et al., 2017; Jarrett et al., 2023). A distinct paradigm, exemplified by Go-Explore (Ecoffet et al., 2019, 2021b), explicitly separates learning into two phases. The first focuses purely on state discovery, while the second learns a deployable policy from successful trajectories. We adopt this philosophy, treating sparse-reward environments initially as pure exploration problems. A key distinction, however, is that Go-Explore relies on specific observation discretization to track visited states. In high-dimensional spaces, such discretization 2risks significant information loss. Furthermore, Go-Explore requires the environment to be deterministic during exploration. 1 In contrast, our approach relies on a general uncertainty measure to guide a simple tree-search strategy. This allows our method to scale to high-dimensional spaces without manual discretization or assumptions of determinism. Despite these algorithmic differences, both approaches serve a similar purpose; they function as unsupervised mechanisms to generate “successful trajectories,” from which an exploiting policy can be learned using, for example, the backward algorithm by Salimans and Chen. (2018a) or reverse curriculum generation (Florensa et al., 2017). 

Leveraging resets as a computational primitive. A central component of our approach is the use of resets (Kocsis and Szepesvári, 2006; Coulom, 2006; Yin et al., 2023b), which is the ability to restore the agent to a previously visited state. While resets are sometimes viewed as infeasible for physical robots (Eysenbach et al., 2017; Gupta et al., 2021), this view overlooks simulation’s role in modern AI training. Even for physical applications, policies are increasingly pre-trained in simulation, from robotic manipulation to autonomous driving (Qassem et al., 2010; Bojarski et al., 2016; Tobin et al., 2017; Akkaya et al., 2019; Bansal et al., 2018). In these settings, ignoring the capability to reset is a missed opportunity (Mhammedi et al., 2024). This argument is particularly relevant for modern LLM applications, where the “environment” is a token sequence and resetting merely entails restoring a context window (Foster et al., 2025; Chang et al., 2024). Finally, recent theoretical work shows that local simulator access enables efficient learning where standard online RL is provably inefficient (Li et al., 2021; Mhammedi et al., 2024). The power of simulator access is also evident in the success of planning algorithms like MCTS and AlphaZero (Silver et al., 2016, 2018). 2

Intrinsic motivation and world models. While the separation of exploration and exploitation offers a powerful alternative, the dominant approach remains training agents with intrinsic motivation (Stadie et al., 2015; Mnih et al., 2015, 2016; Bellemare et al., 2016; Espeholt et al., 2018; Badia et al., 2020b). Recent successful methods, such as BYOL-Explore (Guo et al., 2022), derive this signal from learned latent world model prediction error. Extensions like BYOL-Hindsight (Jarrett et al., 2023) handle stochastic environments, representing the state-of-the-art for hard exploration. However, even these advanced methods achieve scores that remain far below the games’ potential on the hardest benchmarks, and most other intrinsic motivation methods fail to make meaningful progress at all. While driving exploration by targeting regions of high model error is an elegant concept, the limited performance on hard benchmarks suggests that maximizing these signals via RL may be inefficient. 

Relationship to Monte Carlo Tree Search. Both our algorithm, GowU (introduced in Section 4), and Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) (Kocsis and Szepesvári, 2006; Coulom, 2006) build search trees using simulator access, but they differ in purpose, structure, and guidance mechanism. MCTS is a planning 

algorithm that constructs a fresh search tree at each decision point to select the next action during inference; its tree is transient and guided by a learned value function combined with an upper confidence bound (UCB) (Auer et al., 2002). In contrast, GowU is a training-time exploration algorithm: it builds a single persistent lineage tree across the entire episode to discover high-reward trajectories, which are subsequently distilled into a deployable policy via supervised learning. No search is performed at inference. Furthermore, MCTS simulates one trajectory at a time from the current decision node, whereas GowU maintains a population 

of particles that evolve concurrently, with explicit cloning and pruning operations inspired by the GWTW 

principle (Aldous and Vazirani, 1994). Finally, while MCTS relies on reward-based value estimates to guide expansion, GowU uses epistemic uncertainty as its primary signal, making it better suited for sparse-reward settings where value estimates are uninformative.     

> 1Latent Go-Explore (Gallouédec and Dellandréa, 2023) replaces manual discretization with a learned latent representation, though this introduces a chicken-and-egg problem: a useful representation requires exploration data that is not yet available. More critically, the method is evaluated only on exploration, where it performs slightly better than Go-Explore on Montezuma’s Revenge and Pitfall! . It is unclear whether their cell-free approach enables learning a deployable policy after the exploration phase.
> 2While MCTS and AlphaZero rely on resets at inference, we leverage them strictly during training; the resulting policy is fully executable at inference without simulator access.

33 Preliminaries 

We consider the problem of exploration in a stochastic episodic Markov Decision Process (MDP) defined by the tuple M = (X , A, 𝑃, 𝑅 ). Here, X and A are potentially high-dimensional state and action spaces, respectively; 𝑃 : X × A → Δ(X) the transition dynamics, and 𝑅 : X × A → R a deterministic reward function. 

Survival and failure. Episodic MDPs define termination conditions that mark the end of a trajectory. For instance, in games like Atari, an episode typically ends after all lives are lost. Our framework allows for distinguishing between this standard termination and a stricter notion of failure we use for early episode truncation. In the Atari context, for example, we may treat the loss of a single life as a failure event; similarly, in continuous control, a state from which further progress is impossible (e.g., a quadruped flipping upside down in the AntMaze environment) can be treated as a failure, even if the environment does not formally terminate the episode. We demonstrate that using this flexibility can significantly improve exploration efficiency. To formalize this, we partition the state space into two disjoint sets: viable states, denoted Alive , and failure states, denoted Dead . A particle is considered “alive” if 𝑠 𝑡 ∈ Alive . We further define the set of Doom 

states, XDoom ⊂ Alive , as the set of viable states from which entry into Dead is inevitable, regardless of the policy. Ideally, an exploration algorithm should be able to backtrack from these dead-end states to preserve the potential for future rewards. Our approach is designed for settings where progress—accumulating rewards or task completion—remains feasible from any non-Doom viable state. The goal of the exploration phase is to find trajectories with high cumulative rewards. We use an uncertainty-guided tree-search based on the GWTW principle (Aldous and Vazirani, 1994) to find such trajectories. 

Go-With-The-Winner. Originally proposed for randomized search and sampling, GWTW is especially effective at finding deep nodes in imbalanced trees—a task where naive approaches like Depth-First or Breadth-First search can be computationally inefficient (see Appendix A for a concrete example). The algorithm operates by maintaining a population of 𝑁 particles starting at the root. At each step, every particle advances one level by following a random edge. Crucially, particles that reach a leaf are pruned and replaced by clones of particles that reached non-leaf nodes, designated as “winners.” Theoretical guarantees for reaching a target depth in GWTW worsen gracefully with a measure of tree imbalance (Aldous and Vazirani, 1994). Our approach builds on this principle by viewing exploration in an MDP as a search for “deep” nodes, where depth is characterized by high cumulative reward and epistemic uncertainty. To adapt GWTW for exploration, we map “leaves” to Dead states and redefine “winners” as states combining high accumulated reward and epistemic uncertainty. 

Uncertainty oracle. Epistemic uncertainty represents the lack of knowledge resulting from limited data, as distinct from the inherent stochasticity of the environment (Osband et al., 2018; Kendall and Gal, 2017; Burda et al., 2019). In the context of exploration, this reflects the scarcity of observations for specific states or transitions. Our framework assumes access to an uncertainty estimator, 𝑈 , which provides a measure of this uncertainty for a given state. We rely on this estimator to update online: as states are visited, the associated uncertainty should decrease. Our framework is agnostic to the specific implementation of 𝑈 (though in our experiments, we operationalize 𝑈 using RND prediction error as a proxy). 

Reset oracle. To enable cloning and redistribute computational effort (like GWTW ), we require overwriting one particle’s state with another’s. We formalize this through a reset primitive, Reset ( 𝑝 target , 𝑝 source ), which sets the internal state of 𝑝 target to match 𝑝 source . This allows 𝑝 target to resume trajectory generation from the state of 𝑝 source . This oracle is a training-time primitive for data collection only; it is not required for the final policy’s execution or evaluation. 

Particle policies. Our framework is agnostic to the mechanism each particle uses to select actions. While our approach coordinates the redistribution of computational effort across the population, it does not dictate how individual particles choose their moves, ensuring the framework remains general. In our experiments, we employ reward-free diversity policies based on bootstrapped zero-target networks, as described in Section 5. 

Backward algorithm. The trajectories discovered during exploration can be used in a second phase to learn high-scoring policies. Although these trajectories may contain redundancies or suboptimal loops, they 4Root         

> p1p2p3
> p1p2p3
> p1p2p3
> ALIVE State
> DEAD State
> Max Uncertainty State
> Failure Reset
> Group Consolidation Reset
> p1p2p3
> Max Reward State

Figure 1: Schematic overview of GowU with a single group of particles. The algorithm maintains a population of particles ( 𝑝 1, 𝑝 2, 𝑝 3) that explore the state space via multi-step rollouts. During an outer step, if a particle reaches a dead state (e.g., 𝑝 2 on level one), it is pruned and its state is reset via a Reset to the winner—the 

alive node maximizing accumulated reward, with epistemic uncertainty used as a tie-breaker. After 𝐾 outer steps, a Group Consolidation Reset syncs all particles, including alive particles, to the current winner. serve as self-generated demonstrations for supervised backward learning algorithms (Salimans and Chen., 2018a; Ecoffet et al., 2019). This class of algorithms begins training near the end of a demonstration and progressively moves the starting state back along the demonstration as the agent masters each suffix segment. This creates a natural curriculum that significantly simplifies the reinforcement learning problem. In our experiments, we use this framework to obtain high-scoring policies across all evaluated environments. 

Notation. We define the lexicographic order ≻lex over tuples such that (𝑏, 𝑐 ) ≻ lex (𝑏 ′, 𝑐 ′) if and only if 𝑏 > 𝑏 ′

or ( 𝑏 = 𝑏 ′ and 𝑐 > 𝑐 ′). Accordingly, for any two functions 𝑓 and 𝑔 , we use the notation lex-argmax 𝑢 ( 𝑓 (𝑢 ), 𝑔 (𝑢 )) 

to denote the argument 𝑢 that maximizes the vector objective with respect to ≻lex . This operator prioritizes maximizing the first component 𝑓 (𝑢 ), using the second component 𝑔 (𝑢 ) strictly as a tie-breaker. 

# 4 Method: Uncertainty-Guided Exploration 

Building on the primitives in Section 3, we propose Go-With-Uncertainty (GowU ), a tree-search method decoupling exploration from policy optimization. Our approach adapts the GWTW principle by maintaining a population of particles that explore the state space in parallel. At fixed intervals, the algorithm identifies “winners”—those in states with high cumulative reward and epistemic uncertainty. Using the reset oracle, it redistributes computational effort by cloning winners and removing dead particles. We first describe the state-lineage tree, which tracks particle history and enables population management. We then detail particle evolution and the winner selection scoring function, referencing the pseudo-algorithms Algorithms 1 and 2 along the way. 54.1 The State Lineage Tree 

To manage populations, GowU maintains a global state-lineage tree . Each node in this tree represents a valid, checkpointed state of the environment. Formally, a tree node 𝑣 is a tuple (𝑠 𝑣 , 𝑅 𝑣 , 𝑢 𝑣 ), where 𝑠 𝑣 is the compact state representation (e.g., simulator snapshot); 𝑅 𝑣 is the cumulative extrinsic reward achieved by the agent up to state 𝑠 𝑣 ; and 𝑢 𝑣 is a pointer to the parent node. This structure allows the algorithm to track the history of every particle. To manage memory, nodes are pruned when they are no longer occupied by an active particle or referenced by any descendant. This ensures that the storage requirements scale with the set of active lineages rather than the cumulative history of the search. 

# 4.2 Particle Evolution 

We now describe the search procedure, which implements our adaptation of GWTW to drive exploration using a group of 𝑁 particles (e.g., 𝑁 = 32 for some of our experiments). The search proceeds in discrete iterations. Algorithm 1 details the execution of a single iteration, which consists of a sequence of 𝐾 outer steps , followed by a synchronization phase, where 𝐾 is sampled uniformly from [𝐾 min , 𝐾 max ] at the start of each iteration. 

Evolutionary rollout. During an outer step, every alive particle interacts with its own instance of the environment for a random number of simulation steps ( inner steps ) sampled independently for each particle from the range [𝑇 min , 𝑇 max ] (see Algorithm 1, Line 4). During these steps, the uncertainty estimator 𝑈 may update based on newly collected observations (recall from Section 3 that our framework is agnostic to the specific choice of local policy). If a particle receives a positive reward, the rollout is terminated immediately (Algorithm 1, Line 8); this secures the reward for the subsequent winner selection, as further steps may lead to a dead state. If a particle completes the rollout without entering a dead state, the algorithm creates a new child node in the lineage tree (Algorithm 1, Line 11). The rollout length range controls a key trade-off: overly short rollouts limit state diversity, while overly long ones increase the frequency of dead states. (In our experiments, 𝑇 min and 𝑇 max are set between 3 and 20 .) 

Failure recovery via rollback. If the entire population enters a Dead state during a rollout, the algorithm performs a collective rollback . Every particle traverses the lineage tree via parent pointers 𝑢 𝑣 to a randomly selected ancestor between 𝑘 min and 𝑘 max generations prior (Algorithm 1, Line 17). This restores the particles to valid antecedent states, allowing exploration of alternative trajectories around obstacles. A sufficiently large 𝑘 max allows particles to escape doom states (e.g., irreversible falls), while a low 𝑘 min maintains proximity to difficult obstacles, enabling alternative trajectory attempts ( 𝑘 min , 𝑘 max ∈ [ 1, 20 ] in our experiments). 

Winner selection and particle redistribution. When at least one particle survives the inner steps 

rollout, the algorithm redistributes computational effort by identifying “winners.” 1. Winner selection: The algorithm identifies the alive particles with the maximum accumulated reward. Among these, it selects the particle with the highest epistemic uncertainty 𝑈 (𝑠 ) (Algorithm 1, Line 20). This prioritizes high-value, under-explored states; in environments with sparse rewards (like the ones in our experiments), uncertainty is often the primary criterion for selection. 2. Pruning: All dead particles are immediately reset to the winner’s state (Algorithm 1, Line 23). This prunes failed branches and redirects those resources to the current frontier. Non-winner alive particles continue independent trajectories to maintain local diversity. 

Group consolidation. At the conclusion of the 𝐾 outer steps , the algorithm performs an additional synchronization to consolidate progress. We identify a single population winner based on accumulated reward and uncertainty as described in Item 1. Unlike the mid-iteration particle redistribution (i.e., after the inner steps ) where only dead particles are redistributed, this phase resets the entire population to the state of this single winner (Algorithm 1, Line 30). This collapses the group to the most promising node found during the iteration, ensuring subsequent search begins from the frontier of discovered states. 6Algorithm 1 EvolveGroup 

input: Population 𝑃 = {𝑝 1, . . . , 𝑝 𝑁 }, lineage tree T , uncertainty 𝑈 

params: outer steps , inner steps , and rollback ranges: [𝐾 min , 𝐾 max ], [𝑇 min , 𝑇 max ], [𝑘 min , 𝑘 max ] 

> 1:

Sample outer steps 𝐾 ∼ Unif (𝐾 min , 𝐾 max ) 

> 2:

for 𝑘 = 1, . . . , 𝐾 do  

> 3:

for each particle 𝑝 𝑖 ∈ 𝑃 do  

> 4:

Sample inner steps 𝑇 𝑖 ∼ Unif (𝑇 min , 𝑇 max )  

> 5: /* Rollout particle and update uncertainty */
> 6:

for 𝑡 = 1, . . . , 𝑇 𝑖 do  

> 7:

𝑈 ← 𝑝 𝑖 .Step (1, 𝑈 ) // Execute one step  

> 8:

if 𝑝 𝑖 is dead or 𝑝 𝑖 .𝑅 increased then break // Halting on reward does not kill the particle  

> 9:

end for  

> 10:

if 𝑝 𝑖 is alive then  

> 11:

T .AddChild ( 𝑝 𝑖 ) // Expand tree for surviving particles  

> 12:

end if  

> 13:

end for  

> 14:

if All 𝑝 𝑖 ∈ 𝑃 are Dead then   

> 15: /* Failure recovery via rollback */
> 16:

𝑣 𝑖, anc ← 𝑝 𝑖 .GetAncestor (𝑘 min , 𝑘 max ), ∀𝑖 // Select 𝑘 𝑖 th ancestor of 𝑝 𝑖 with 𝑘 𝑖 ∼ Unif (𝑘 min , 𝑘 max ), ∀𝑖  

> 17:

𝑃 ← { Reset ( 𝑝 𝑖 , 𝑣 𝑖, anc ) | ∀ 𝑖 } // Restore all particles to ancestor checkpoints  

> 18:

else   

> 19: /* Uncertainty-aware redistribution */
> 20:

𝑝 winner ← lex-argmax 𝑝 ∈ 𝑃, 𝑝. alive ( 𝑝.𝑅, 𝑈 ( 𝑝 )) // Best alive: max reward, break ties by uncertainty  

> 21:

for each 𝑝 𝑖 ∈ 𝑃 do  

> 22:

if 𝑝 𝑖 is Dead then  

> 23:

Reset ( 𝑝 𝑖 , 𝑝 winner ) // Prune & respawn; 𝑝 𝑖 becomes alive after the reset  

> 24:

end if  

> 25:

end for  

> 26:

end if  

> 27:

end for   

> 28: /* Group consolidation (lexicographic ranking) */
> 29:

𝑝 winner ← lex-argmax 𝑝 ∈ 𝑃 ( 𝑝.𝑅, 𝑈 ( 𝑝 ))  

> 30:

𝑃 ← { Reset ( 𝑝 𝑗 , 𝑝 winner ) | ∀ 𝑗 } // Reset all particles to winner’s checkpoint  

> 31:

return 𝑃, T , 𝑈, 𝑝 winner 

# 4.3 Parallel Groups and Population Synchronization 

To diversify the search and accelerate discovery, GowU runs 𝑀 groups in parallel; see Algorithm 2 (e.g., 

𝑀 = 4 for our atari experiments). While these groups may execute rollouts independently, our framework allows the groups to share a centralized uncertainty estimator. This enables implicit coordination: updates from one group discourage others from revisiting the same states, pushing the collective population toward globally novel regions. To further prevent groups from stagnating in explored regions, the algorithm employs a global synchronization mechanism at the start of each iteration. We identify a single “global winner” across all 𝑀 groups based on the reward-uncertainty criterion in Item 1 (Algorithm 2, Line 16). The algorithm then compares each group’s maximum reward to the global winner’s. If a group’s best reward is strictly lower, all its particles are reset to the global winner (Algorithm 2, Line 10). If equal, the group continues its search independently. This mechanism balances diversity with efficiency: it allows competitive groups to explore unique trajectories while propagating breakthrough discoveries across the entire population. 7Algorithm 2 GowU : Go-With-Uncertainty 

input: Env. E, iterations 𝑁 iter , number of groups 𝑀 , and number of particles per group 𝑁  

> 1:

Initialize lineage tree T with root node 𝑠 0 (initial state)  

> 2:

Initialize groups {𝐺 1, . . . , 𝐺 𝑀 }, each with 𝑁 particles, all starting at 𝑠 0 

> 3:

Initialize shared uncertainty estimator 𝑈  

> 4:

𝑝 winner ← 𝑠 0 

> 5:

for 𝑖 = 1, . . . , 𝑁 iter do  

> 6:

for each Group 𝐺 𝑚 in parallel do   

> 7: /* Global synchronization */
> 8:

𝑝 𝑚 ← lex-argmax 𝑝 ∈𝐺 𝑚 ( 𝑝.𝑅, 𝑈 ( 𝑝 ))  

> 9:

if 𝑝 𝑚 .𝑅 < 𝑝 winner .𝑅 then  

> 10:

Reset 𝐺 𝑚 to the state of 𝑝 winner // Restore all particles to global winner’s checkpoint  

> 11:

end if   

> 12: /* Evolve group */
> 13:

𝐺 𝑚 , T , 𝑈, 𝑝 𝑚 ← EvolveGroup (𝐺 𝑚 , T , 𝑈 ) // Algorithm 1  

> 14:

end for   

> 15: /* Update global winner */
> 16:

𝑝 winner ← lex-argmax 𝑝 ∈ { 𝑝 1 ,..., 𝑝 𝑀 , 𝑝 winner } ( 𝑝.𝑅, 𝑈 ( 𝑝 ))  

> 17:

end for 

# 5 GowU Implementation Details 

This section describes our implementation of the framework presented in Section 4. We use a distributed architecture to enable scalable exploration (Section 5.1), then describe the uncertainty estimator used to guide particle synchronization (Section 5.2) and the reward-free particle policies that drive local action selection (Section 5.3). 

# 5.1 Distributed Architecture 

To scale GowU to high-dimensional environments, we employ a distributed coordinator-worker architecture that decouples environment simulation, population management, and parameter optimization. The system consists of three components: 

• Central coordinator. Manages the global population state, including the 𝑀 groups of 𝑁 particles each (see Section 4), their environment checkpoints, cumulative rewards, and survival status. It also maintains the state-lineage tree (Section 4.1). The coordinator drives the GowU loop: it dispatches rollout requests to the worker pool, aggregates results, queries the uncertainty estimator 𝑈 (Section 5.2) to score states, and executes the winner-selection, pruning, and group-synchronization logic described in Sections 4.2 and 4.3. 

• Distributed rollout workers. Stateless execution nodes that receive an environment checkpoint and policy parameters—indexed by group and ensemble member—from the coordinator. Each worker restores the simulator state, executes a rollout by sampling actions from the designated policy, and returns the resulting trajectory and endpoint checkpoint for tree expansion. 

• Asynchronous learning nodes. Dedicated processes that continuously consume transitions from the replay buffers and update model parameters (uncertainty estimator and particle policies) via gradient descent, broadcasting updated weights for subsequent rollouts. This architecture enables high-throughput exploration with minimal idle time. Further implementation details are provided in Appendix F. 

Replay buffers. Each group maintains a replay buffer of capacity 128 ,000 that stores transitions. Each entry has the form (𝑠, 𝑎, 𝑚 ), where 𝑠 is the observation, 𝑎 the action, and 𝑚 ∈ { 0, 1} a bootstrap mask drawn independently at collection time. Workers stream transitions into these buffers, from which the asynchronous learning nodes sample mini-batches continuously. 

Lineage tree. Recall from Section 4.1 that GowU relies on a state lineage tree for population management. 8We implement this using a TreeNode class that stores the environment checkpoint, cumulative reward, and a parent pointer. To extract a demonstration path for Phase II, we select the highest-reward leaf and traverse the parent pointers upward, collecting the environment checkpoint and cumulative reward at each node. 

# 5.2 Uncertainty Estimation Using RND 

The GowU algorithm relies on an uncertainty score 𝑈 (𝑠 ) to rank particles and select winners (Section 4.2). To instantiate this estimator, we use standard RND (Burda et al., 2018), whose predictor is trained asynchronously by a dedicated learning node (Section 5.1). At a high level, RND quantifies novelty via the prediction error of a trained network against a fixed, random target. We choose RND for its scalability and efficiency compared to other methods that approximate epistemic uncertainty such as ensemble methods (Osband et al., 2016; Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017). Formally, the module consists of a fixed target network 

and a trainable predictor network . Both use standard Atari convolutional torsos (Mnih et al., 2015) followed by MLP heads consisting of two 1024-unit linear layers separated by a ReLU activation. We use orthogonal initialization for the torso weights and normalize inputs (running mean/std) clipped to [− 5, 5], consistent with standard RND implementations (Burda et al., 2018). The predictor is trained to minimize the Mean Squared Error (MSE) against the target embedding. As described in Section 5.1, the predictor is trained asynchronously by a dedicated learning node that continuously samples mini-batches from the replay buffers of all 𝑀 groups, ensuring that the uncertainty estimate reflects collectively discovered states. We use a batch size of 128 and train using Adam with a learning rate of 3 × 10 −4.

# 5.3 Particle Behavior and Action Selection 

The final component of GowU is the local policy that each particle uses to select actions during rollouts. Recall from Section 4 that our exploration framework is agnostic to particle behavior. Consequently, one could simply use random local policies, mirroring the random edge selection of the original GWTW algorithm or the random action strategy of Go-Explore . However, uniform random action selection is well known to produce jittery, oscillatory behavior, causing particles to frequently revisit nearby states instead of making sustained progress through the state space. To mitigate this, we equip each particle with a simple learned policy that yields temporally consistent local behavior and promotes behavioral diversity across particles, all without using any environment reward signal. The specific policy architecture differs between discrete and continuous action spaces, as detailed below; see Appendix E for the full training objectives. 

Atari (Discrete Actions). Each particle within a group maintains its own network 𝑓 𝜓 that maps state-action pairs (𝑠, 𝑎 ) to scalar predictions. The environment reward is discarded entirely; it plays no role in training these networks. Instead, each network is trained by minimizing the mean squared error (MSE) against a constant zero target, using only a random subset of the group’s experience determined by a binary bootstrap mask (see Appendix E for the training loss). This mechanism is conceptually related to BootDQN (Osband et al., 2016), except that the targets carry no reward information. Because each network trains on a different masked subset of data, they develop different prediction landscapes, and the arg max actions differ across particles, yielding diverse trajectories. Given a state 𝑠 , each particle selects 𝑎 = arg max 𝑎 ∈ A 𝑓 𝜓 (𝑠, 𝑎 ) (ties broken uniformly at random) with probability 1 − 𝜀 , and a uniform random action with probability 𝜀 = 0.2.

Remark 5.1. Because the ensemble value functions are trained with identically zero targets, they quickly converge toward zero. However, this does not reduce the ensemble to purely random action selection: in practice, exact numerical ties across actions are rare because the different masked training subsets induce small but persistent differences in the predicted values. As a result, the arg max still produces a deterministic, temporally consistent action for each state rather than sampling uniformly. 

MuJoCo (Continuous Actions). For continuous action spaces, each particle maintains a Soft Actor-Critic (SAC) module with a double critic and entropy-regularized policy. As in the discrete case, the environment reward is discarded: the critics are trained toward zero targets, and diversity across particles arises from bootstrap masking combined with entropy regularization. During rollouts, actions are sampled 9(a) Montezuma’s Revenge (b) Pitfall! (c) Venture 

Figure 2: Fully rendered observations from the three hard-exploration Atari games used in our evaluation. from the learned (stochastic) policy, providing inherent exploration noise without requiring explicit 𝜀 -greedy randomization. To ensure temporally consistent behavior within each rollout segment, we fix the random seed for action sampling at the start of each inner steps block; this prevents the stochastic policy from producing jittery, incoherent trajectories. See Appendix E for the complete training objectives. As with the uncertainty estimator, particle policies are trained asynchronously by dedicated learning nodes (Section 5.1). Unlike RND , however, each group’s ensemble trains on group-specific data only, preserving behavioral diversity across groups. We use the Muon optimizer with learning rate 10 −4 and batch size 𝑛 = 128 .

Remark 5.2. Although our experiments employ these learned ensemble policies, the ablation study in Section 6.3 demonstrates (for the discrete-action setting) that a simpler alternative—sampling a single random action per particle and holding it fixed for the duration of the inner steps —performs on par with the learned ensemble. This confirms that the ensemble particle policies are not essential: the exploration power of 

GowU lies in the population management mechanisms (winner selection, pruning, and rollback), not in the individual particle policies. We expect that simpler heuristics for particle policies could also work in continuous domains; we adopt the ensemble SAC approach here primarily to maintain a morally similar structure to the discrete setting. In any case, the core principle of our framework remains one of separating exploration from policy optimization: the exploration mechanism is fundamentally agnostic to particle behavior, functioning independently of whether particles use random walks, fixed heuristics, or learned models. 

# 6 Experiments 

We evaluate GowU on two families of hard-exploration benchmarks spanning both discrete and continuous action spaces: Atari games ( Montezuma’s Revenge , Pitfall! , and Venture ) and MuJoCo continuous-control tasks (AntMaze and Adroit dexterous manipulation). Our experiments are designed to answer the following research questions: 

• RQ1 (Exploration efficiency): Can GowU efficiently discover high-reward and task-completing trajectories across both discrete and continuous domains? 

• RQ2 (Quality of exploratory data): Can the discovered trajectories be distilled into deployable policies that achieve high scores (Atari) or high success rates (MuJoCo)? 

# 6.1 Experimental Setup 

Atari environments. We evaluate on Montezuma’s Revenge , Pitfall! , and Venture —three of the most challenging exploration benchmarks in the Arcade Learning Environment (ALE) Bellemare et al. (2013); Machado et al. (2018). Montezuma’s Revenge requires long-horizon planning across multiple rooms, while 

Pitfall! presents a distinct challenge due to its very sparse rewards and visually similar rooms. Notably, 

Pitfall! remains largely unsolved without human demonstrations or domain knowledge (Ecoffet et al., 2021a) when using sticky actions. Venture requires the agent to enter rooms, collect treasure, and escape before a pursuing enemy catches up; any delay in locating or reaching the treasure allows the enemy to close the gap, making the task a test of not just exploration but fast exploration under time pressure. 10 (a) door-v0 (b) hammer-v0 (c) relocate-v0 (d) AntMaze 

Figure 3: MuJoCo continuous-control tasks used in our evaluation. (a–c) Adroit dexterous manipulation tasks using the 24-DoF ShadowHand. (d) AntMaze navigation task (top-down view). 

MuJoCo environments. To evaluate GowU on continuous action spaces, we consider two families of tasks that require deep exploration from visual observations: 

• AntMaze (antmaze-large-diverse-v0 ): A quadruped ant must navigate a large maze to reach a goal position. The environment provides only a sparse terminal reward upon reaching the goal (the default setting), requiring sustained exploration through extended corridors and dead ends. 

• Adroit (door-v0 , hammer-v0 , relocate-v0 ): Dexterous manipulation tasks using the 24-degree-of-freedom ShadowHand (Rajeswaran et al., 2018). door-v0 requires opening a door by its handle, hammer-v0 requires picking up a hammer and driving a nail, and relocate-v0 requires grasping a ball and moving it to a target location. The high dimensionality of the action space and the precision required for manipulation make these tasks extremely challenging. We enable the sparse_reward flag, which replaces the default dense reward shaping with a single task-completion reward. Although the MuJoCo dynamics are deterministic, task configurations are randomized across seeds, preventing the policy from memorizing a fixed action sequence. For AntMaze, the target location is slightly randomized around the top-right corner of the maze. For door-v0 , the position of the door and handle are perturbed across episodes; similarly, the nail position varies in hammer-v0 . For relocate-v0 , the randomization is more substantial: both the ball and target locations change significantly between seeds. We aim to solve all MuJoCo tasks from images : the final distilled policy receives only visual observations, not privileged state information. 

Observation processing. All environments produce grayscale, frame-stacked visual observations. For Atari, we follow the standard pipeline (Mnih et al., 2015): frames are temporally max-pooled over the last 2 of every 4 repeated frames, converted to grayscale, and resized to 84 × 84 pixels. The final observation stacks the 4 most recent processed frames, yielding a tensor of shape 84 × 84 × 4. For Venture , we additionally apply 2×2 spatial max-pooling before resizing to preserve small game sprites that would otherwise vanish under bilinear interpolation. For Phase II (backward learning) on Montezuma’s Revenge , a fifth frame is appended corresponding to the most recent reward observation—i.e., the frame at which the agent last received a reward (see Appendix G for details). For the Adroit tasks, we render directly at 120 × 120 pixels via a hardware-accelerated MuJoCo camera with a task-specific fixed viewpoint (detailed in Appendix C), convert to grayscale, and stack 4 frames ( 120 × 120 × 4). For AntMaze, we render two complementary views at 120 × 120 : a global top-down map of the full maze (with a goal marker injected into the scene) and a third-person egocentric view tracking the agent. During Phase I (exploration), only the global view is used (120 × 120 × 1); during Phase II (policy distillation), the global frame is stacked with 4 historical egocentric frames ( 120 × 120 × 5). All pixel values are normalized to [0, 1]. Full pipeline details (camera poses, resampling methods, rendering configuration) are provided in Appendix C. 

Additional environment settings. For the Atari environments, we run both the exploration phase ( GowU )and the policy distillation phase using sticky actions : the previous action repeats with probability 0.25 ,introducing aleatoric uncertainty. We use the standard action repeat of 4, where the selected action is applied 4 times; thus, each environment step consumes four game frames (Machado et al., 2017). For AntMaze, we similarly apply an action repeat of 4 over the physics steps. Adroit tasks use no action repeat owing to the precision required for dexterous manipulation. Unlike Montezuma’s Revenge and Venture , Pitfall! includes a 11 Frame −3 Frame −2 Frame −1 Frame 0 Frame top 

door 

hammer 

relocate 

antmaze 

Figure 4: Processed visual observations as seen by the agent for each MuJoCo task. Each column shows a frame in the observation stack, from the oldest (Frame −3) to the most recent (Frame 0). For AntMaze, the “Frame top” column shows the global top-down view of the maze; during Phase I (exploration), only this top-down view is used. See Section 6.1 for an overview and Appendix C for full details on the observation processing pipeline. twenty-minute termination timer; we disable this timer to allow for non-episodic exploration with GowU 

(see Appendix B), but final policies are evaluated with the standard timer active. 

Exploration signals (Phase I). During the exploration phase (Phase I), GowU leverages easily accessible signals to identify dead states, guiding particle redistribution across all environments. 

• Atari: For all three games, a loss of life—detected via a discount factor of zero—triggers a dead state designation. Additionally, in Pitfall! , any negative reward (e.g., from touching a rolling barrel) also constitutes a dead state, as it signals an unrecoverable penalty. For Montezuma’s Revenge , we also detect and prevent exploitation of a newly discovered environment bug in the middle room (see Appendix H). 

• AntMaze: Flipping over constitutes a loss of life (i.e., the particle is marked as dead ), since the ant becomes irrecoverably stuck. See Appendix D for details on how this condition is extracted. 

• Adroit: For each task, we additionally define a single intermediate reward based on contact with the target surface. A reward of +1 is assigned when the hand first makes contact with the relevant object—the door handle ( door-v0 ), the hammer ( hammer-v0 ), or the ball ( relocate-v0 ). If contact with the target surface is subsequently lost, this constitutes a loss of life and the particle is marked as dead .We emphasize that these signals are straightforwardly extracted from readily available state information and are far from the heavy reward shaping typically required by standard RL algorithms. Nevertheless, they interact with GowU in a non-trivial way. Positive events serve as milestones that mark progress toward the goal, while dead state events signal a critical setback. 

Policy distillation (Phase II). Following the exploration phase, we distill the discovered trajectories into deployable policies using only the original environment rewards (the additional exploration signals from Phase I are not used). For each GowU run, we extract the highest-reward trajectory from the lineage tree (Section 5.1) and use it as a demonstration for a backward learning curriculum (Salimans and Chen., 12 2018a). The agent is initialized near the end of the demonstration and trained using PPO (Schulman et al., 2017) to maximize cumulative reward from that point forward; as it masters the task, the initialization is progressively moved backward toward the start of the episode. For Atari, we decompose each demonstration into 10 segments delineated by reward events, training on all segments simultaneously; this decomposition breaks the long-horizon problem into manageable sub-tasks. For MuJoCo, no segmentation is applied and the goal location is held fixed to the one used during exploration while the curriculum progresses backward along a given demonstration. Once the curriculum reaches the initial state, the goal (i.e., the randomized target location and object placement described above) is allowed to vary across episodes, training the policy to generalize; using 10 demonstrations per Phase II run, each corresponding to a different goal configuration, provides initial diversity across goals. Throughout training, a background evaluator periodically fetches the latest policy weights and tracks the 

100 best-performing checkpoints. After training is complete, these checkpoints are evaluated on 500 rollouts each, and the best-performing one is selected as the final policy. See Appendix G for additional details on the curriculum strategy, environment-specific configurations, and evaluation procedures. 

Resets. Both Phase I and Phase II rely on environment resets to restore particles or training episodes to previously visited states. Reconstructing the environment mid-trajectory requires checkpointing both the simulator’s physical state and the agent’s observation history (e.g., frame stacks). The mechanism differs across environment families: 

• Atari: We extract and restore the internal ALE emulator state along with the frame stacker’s observation history, following the implementation of Yin et al. (2023a, Page 21). 

• Adroit: We checkpoint the MuJoCo physics state (joint positions and velocities), the random seed (which determines the randomized object and target positions), and task-specific state variables (e.g., whether contact with the target surface has been established). 

• AntMaze: In addition to the MuJoCo physics state, we save the random seed (which determines the randomized goal coordinates) and the pixel observation stack from the third-person camera renders. In all cases, the frame stack is replaced with the one saved at checkpoint time. 

Hyperparameters. Table 1 summarizes the main population management hyperparameters introduced in Section 4. Table 1: Population management hyperparameters for GowU . The MuJoCo column applies to all continuous-control tasks (AntMaze and Adroit).                                  

> Parameter Montezuma Pitfall Venture MuJoCo
> Groups ( 𝑀 )44416 Particles per group ( 𝑁 )32 32 32 8outer steps range ( [𝐾 min , 𝐾 max ])[10 ,20 ][10 ,20 ][6,16 ][20 ,40 ]
> inner steps range ( [𝑇 min , 𝑇 max ])[5,15 ][10 ,20 ][10 ,20 ][3,4]
> rollback range [𝑘 min , 𝑘 max ][1, 3] [1, 4] [1, 12] [1,20]

Baselines. For Atari, we compare against Go-Explore (no domain knowledge) (Ecoffet et al., 2021b), which represents the current state of the art on hard-exploration games, and three intrinsic motivation methods: RND (Burda et al., 2018), MEME (Kapturowski et al., 2022) ( Agent57 ’s successor (Badia et al., 2020b)), and BYOL-Hindsight (Jarrett et al., 2023). The latter two are among the strongest intrinsic motivation approaches for hard-exploration games. For the MuJoCo tasks, direct baselines are unavailable. For Adroit, recent visual RL methods such as 

DrM (Xu et al., 2024) and MENTOR (Huang et al., 2024) solve door and hammer from pixels without demonstrations, but rely on dense reward shaping. To the best of our knowledge, no existing method solves these tasks in the sparse-reward setting without expert demonstrations or offline datasets, even when using privileged state observations rather than pixels. The relocate task, in particular, remains unsolved without demonstrations even with dense rewards. We note that our Phase I exploration does augment the sparse environment reward with a single intermediate reward signal and a dead-state condition, both derived from 13 privileged state information (see the exploration signals paragraph above and Appendix D for details); these are far simpler than the dense reward shaping required by standard RL methods, but they do go beyond a purely sparse reward signal. For AntMaze, Director (Hafner et al., 2022) solves an egocentric ant maze from first-person pixel inputs with sparse rewards, but their custom maze is smaller than ours (( antmaze-large-diverse-v0 )) and uses uniquely colored walls as navigation landmarks. Several goal-conditioned RL methods (Bortkiewicz et al., 2025; Kim et al., 2021) achieve moderate success rates on AntMaze benchmarks using the JaxGCRL framework (e.g., ∼ 65% on AntMaze-large), but operate from state observations with fixed start and goal locations. In contrast, our setup learns entirely from images with randomized goal locations. 3

# 6.2 Results 

Table 2: Comparison of GowU against baselines on hard-exploration Atari games. For GowU , we report the average cumulative reward along the discovered demonstrations across 100 exploration seeds after 400M frames per seed ( Exploration ) and the average policy score across 10 robustification seeds ( Robustification ). All GowU results use sticky actions ( 𝑝 = 0.25 ). RND , MEME , and BYOL-Hindsight results are reported with sticky actions. Go-Explore uses a deterministic (non-sticky) environment for exploration but evaluates its distilled policies with sticky actions. Baseline numbers are taken from the respective papers. ∗BYOL-Hindsight values are approximate, extracted visually from Figure 19 in the original paper.                            

> Game GowU (ours) Go-Explore RND MEME BYOL-Hind.
> Exploration Robustification Montezuma 98,752.5 182,671.8 43,791 8,152 9,429.20 ∼14 ,517 ∗
> Pitfall 60,600 97,980.4 6,945 −37,820.94 ∼16 ,211 ∗
> Venture 3,330 5,189.6 2,281 1,859 2,583.40 ∼2,328 ∗

Phase I: Exploration. We run GowU with 100 seeds for 400M game frames each to evaluate exploration efficiency on the Atari benchmarks. Table 2 summarizes the average cumulative reward at the end of exploration alongside the baselines, and Figure 5 compares the GowU and Go-Explore (Ecoffet et al., 2021b) exploration curves on each game. Across all three games, GowU discovers high-scoring trajectories substantially faster: it reaches higher cumulative rewards within a fraction of the frames required by 

Go-Explore .We next evaluate whether this efficiency extends to continuous control. As discussed in Section 6.1, no existing method solves the Adroit tasks in the sparse-reward setting without demonstrations or offline data. Table 3 reports statistics on the number of environment frames required for GowU to discover a task-completing trajectory across 100 Phase I seeds for each MuJoCo task. All tasks are solved reliably: hammer requires only 

∼ 26 K frames on average, while relocate —the hardest Adroit task—has a median of ∼ 86 K frames despite high variance. AntMaze requires ∼ 10 M frames on average (already accounting for the action repeat of 4). Table 3: MuJoCo Phase I exploration efficiency: number of environment frames until a task-completing trajectory is first discovered, across 100 GowU seeds. For AntMaze, raw step counts are multiplied by 4 to account for the action repeat.                          

> Task Mean Std Median Min Max
> Hammer 25,731 11,468 24,797 5,577 62,180 Door 218,123 143,297 198,984 20,627 902,163 Relocate 246,436 766,929 86,336 1,727 7,460,062 AntMaze 9,966,117 4,991,098 9,394,478 3,688,488 28,081,212
> 3We note, however, that our training uses the default environment randomization, where the target location is slightly perturbed around a fixed point across seeds. This differs from the D4RL-style “diverse” setting (Fu et al., 2020), where trajectories span substantially different start and goal configurations, requiring greater generalization.

14 (a) Montezuma’s Revenge (b) Pitfall! (c) Venture 

Figure 5: Phase I exploration on Atari: GowU vs. Go-Explore (Ecoffet et al., 2021b). Mean cumulative reward ( ± std) across 100 seeds as a function of game frames. Go-Explore curves are approximated from Extended Data Fig. 2 in (Ecoffet et al., 2021b). GowU discovers high-scoring trajectories substantially faster across all three games. Overall, these results confirm that decoupling exploration from policy optimization yields substantial benefits across both discrete and continuous domains. Table 4: Detailed Phase II robustification statistics for GowU on Atari. We run 10 Phase II runs per game, each trained on 5 random seeds. Each run uses 10 demonstrations for Montezuma’s Revenge and 5 for Pitfall! 

and Venture . We report the mean, standard deviation, median, worst-run, and best-run policy scores across the 10 runs, where each run’s score is the average over its 5 seeds.                     

> Game Mean Std Median Worst-Run Best-Run
> Montezuma 182,671.8 73,150.2 177,476.1 89,172.1 337,834.5
> Pitfall 97,980.4 1,800.4 98,295.0 94,897.9 101,026.8
> Venture 5,189.6 607.7 5,201.2 4,470.2 6,362.1

Table 5: Phase II success rate statistics for MuJoCo tasks. Each Phase II run uses 10 demonstrations and is trained on 5 random seeds. We report the mean, standard deviation, median, worst-run, and best-run success rates across the 10 runs, where each run’s success rate is averaged over its 5 seeds.                          

> Task Mean Std Median Worst-Run Best-Run
> Hammer 0.999 0.002 1.000 0.994 1.000
> Door 0.964 0.060 0.986 0.794 0.993
> Relocate 0.939 0.059 0.965 0.818 0.977
> AntMaze 0.863 0.086 0.893 0.715 0.951

Phase II: Policy distillation. Following the exploration phase, we distill the discovered trajectories into deployable policies via the backward learning curriculum described in Section 6.1. For each task, we run 10 Phase II seeds. Each seed uses 10 demonstrations extracted from the state lineage tree, except for Pitfall! 

and Venture , where we use 5 demonstrations per seed. We note that unlike the demonstrations used for backward learning in (Salimans and Chen., 2018b; Ecoffet et al., 2021b), which consist of a checkpoint at every environment step, ours consist of checkpoints spaced inner steps steps apart, since we only expand the tree at the end of each rollout (see Algorithm 1). Despite the gaps between checkpoints, the backward algorithm successfully learns high-performing policies. For Atari, the robustification column of Table 2 reports the average policy scores, and Table 4 provides detailed statistics (standard deviation, median, worst-run, and best-run) across the 10 Phase II runs. GowU ’s distilled policies surpass all baselines on every game by a wide margin. Notably, even the worst-run scores 15 across all games remain substantially above the best baseline. 

Remark 6.1. In the Montezuma’s Revenge case, some of the highest-scoring distilled policies exploit a known feature of the game, previously documented by Salimans and Chen. (2018b): the key in the first room respawns after a sufficient amount of time has elapsed. Rather than traveling to distant rooms to collect keys, these policies learn to move back and forth between the first room and an adjacent room, waiting for the key to reappear. By collecting keys without traversing the full level, the agent can sometimes complete levels faster, leading to the especially high scores observed for the best runs. 

For the MuJoCo tasks, we evaluate the distilled policies by their success rate (Table 5). GowU achieves near-perfect success rates on the Adroit tasks: 99 .9% on hammer , 96 .4% on door , and 93 .9% on relocate .On AntMaze, the mean success rate is 86 .3% , with the best run reaching 95 .1% . These results confirm that our approach of explicitly separating exploration from exploitation is also effective in continuous-control domains. To the best of our knowledge, no prior method has achieved such high success rates on these tasks from pixels with sparse rewards, without expert demonstrations or dense reward shaping.   

> (a) Component ablation (b) Random actions
> (c) Effect of group size (d) Fixed vs. randomized hyperparameters

Figure 6: Ablation studies on Montezuma’s Revenge . Mean cumulative reward ( ± std) across seeds. (a) Dis-abling uncertainty-based winner selection causes exploration to fail; disabling group consolidation degrades performance. (b) Fixed random policies match learned ensemble policies; purely random actions fail. (c) Per-formance is stable across 1–4 groups but degrades at 8 due to fewer particles per group. (d) Per-iteration hyperparameter randomization yields robust performance without tuning. 16 6.3 Ablation Study 

To validate the design choices underlying GowU , we conduct a series of ablation experiments on Montezuma’s Revenge . Unless stated otherwise, we report the mean cumulative reward (with standard deviation) along the exploration path as a function of game frames. All ablations are conducted on Montezuma’s Revenge with 8 seeds per variant (the baseline uses 100 seeds; see above). Figure 6 presents the results across four experiments. 

Component ablation. We disable individual components of GowU while keeping everything else fixed (Figure 6a). Removing the uncertainty estimator (selecting the winner uniformly at random among surviving particles instead) causes exploration to fail; the variant does not complete the first level. This confirms that epistemic uncertainty is critical for directing the search toward under-explored regions. Disabling the group consolidation step (Algorithm 1, Line 30) also degrades performance: while the variant eventually completes the first level, it does so slower than the baseline. This indicates that periodically collapsing the population to the group’s most uncertain state accelerates progress. An additional benefit of group consolidation is that it results in more frequent pruning, keeping the lineage tree smaller and reducing memory usage. 

Random actions. We compare the baseline ensemble particle policies against two random-action variants (Figure 6b): (i) purely random actions sampled independently at every step, and (ii) a single random policy sampled once per particle and held fixed for the duration of the inner steps (see Section 4). Purely random actions perform poorly due to the jitter phenomenon; without temporal consistency, the particles fail to make sustained directional progress. Surprisingly, the fixed random policy variant performs on par with the learned ensemble policies. This indicates that the ensemble particle policies described in Section 5.3 are not essential for exploration: the system does not rely on any deep-exploration effect akin to BootDQN. This affirms that the population management mechanisms of GowU —winner selection, pruning, and rollback—are what drive exploration, not the individual policies. 

Effect of group size. We vary the number of parallel groups 𝑀 ∈ { 1, 2, 4, 8} while keeping the total number of particles fixed at 64 (i.e., 𝑁 = 64 /𝑀 per group) (Figure 6c). Using 𝑀 = 4 groups performs slightly better, but the differences between 𝑀 ∈ { 1, 2, 4} are modest. Performance deteriorates with 𝑀 = 8 groups, because the number of particles per group drops to 8, making it harder to leverage the particle management logic (winner selection, pruning, and rollback) to navigate around obstacles. 

Robustness to hyperparameter randomization. In our standard configuration, the population manage-ment hyperparameters ( 𝐾 , 𝑇 , and rollback depth) are sampled uniformly from their respective ranges at each iteration. To test robustness, we run an alternative protocol with 20 seeds in which a single draw from each range is fixed for the entire run; different seeds thus correspond to different fixed hyperparameter settings (Figure 6d). Per-iteration randomization yields consistently strong performance, whereas the fixed-draw protocol produces high variance across seeds. This demonstrates that randomization provides inherent robustness: sampling from a reasonable range at each step is sufficient, without needing to identify a single optimal setting. 

# 6.4 Discussion and Future Work 

Our findings suggest that decoupling exploration from policy optimization is a highly promising paradigm for solving hard-exploration tasks. We view these experiments as a proof of concept for this modular design, using GWTW -style tree search to drive the exploration. The generality of this framework extends beyond the environments considered here; we believe it could be adapted for complex reasoning tasks, where particles are LLM instances exploring reasoning chains. In another direction, by bypassing the need for shaped rewards or expert demonstrations, this approach could open the door to scaling up open-ended robotic learning in simulation, where a wide variety of sparse-reward manipulation and locomotion tasks could be solved autonomously (Team et al., 2021). An important direction for future work is investigating alternative, potentially more principled, uncertainty measures. While RND is scalable and effective in our setting, it has known limitations. Most notably its sensitivity to the noisy-TV problem (Burda et al., 2018; Mavor-Parker et al., 2022), where stochastic environment elements can produce persistently high prediction errors unrelated to genuine novelty. Promising 17 alternatives include the learned representations underlying BYOL-Hindsight (Jarrett et al., 2023), which explicitly disentangle aleatoric from epistemic uncertainty and are therefore robust to the noisy-TV issue, as well as temporal contrastive features (Myers et al., 2024; Mohamed et al., 2026), which capture the temporal structure of the environment and can serve as the basis for both metric-aware planning and novelty-driven exploration that is robust to observation noise. 18 References 

Ilge Akkaya, Marcin Andrychowicz, Maciek Chociej, Mateusz Litwin, Bob McGrew, Arthur Petron, Alex Paino, Matthias Plappert, Glenn Powell, Raphael Ribas, et al. Solving rubik’s cube with a robot hand. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.07113 , 2019. David Aldous and Umesh Vazirani. “Go with the winners” algorithms. In Proceedings of the 35th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science , pages 492–501. IEEE, 1994. Peter Auer, Nicolò Cesa-Bianchi, and Paul Fischer. Finite-time analysis of the multiarmed bandit problem. 

Machine Learning , 47(2–3):235–256, 2002. Adrià Puigdomènech Badia, Bilal Piot, Steven Kapturowski, Pablo Sprechmann, Alex Vitvitskyi, Zhao-han Daniel Guo, and Charles Blundell. Agent57: Outperforming the atari human benchmark. In 

International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 507–517, 2020a. Adrià Puigdomènech Badia, Bilal Piot, Steven Kapturowski, Pablo Sprechmann, Alex Vitvitskyi, Zhao-han Daniel Guo, and Charles Blundell. Agent57: Outperforming the atari human benchmark. In 

International conference on machine learning , pages 507–517. PMLR, 2020b. Adrià Puigdomènech Badia, Pablo Sprechmann, Alex Vitvitskyi, Daniel Guo, Bilal Piot, Steven Kapturowski, Olivier Tieleman, Martin Arjovsky, Alexander Pritzel, Andrew Bolt, et al. Never give up: Learning directed exploration strategies. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2020c. Mayank Bansal, Alex Krizhevsky, and Abhijit Ogale. Chauffeurnet: Learning to drive by imitating the best and synthesizing the worst, 2018. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1812.03079 .Andrew G Barto. Intrinsic motivation and reinforcement learning. In Intrinsically motivated learning in natural and artificial systems , pages 17–47. Springer, 2012. Marc Bellemare, Sriram Srinivasan, Georg Ostrovski, Tom Schaul, David Saxton, and Remi Munos. Unifying count-based exploration and intrinsic motivation. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,volume 29, 2016. Marc G Bellemare, Yavar Naddaf, Joel Veness, and Michael Bowling. The arcade learning environment: An evaluation platform for general agents. Journal of artificial intelligence research , 47:253–279, 2013. Mariusz Bojarski, Davide Del Testa, Daniel Dworakowski, Bernhard Firner, Beat Flepp, Prasoon Goyal, Lawrence D Jackel, Mathew Monfort, Urs Muller, Jiakai Zhang, et al. End to end learning for self-driving cars. arXiv preprint arXiv:1604.07316 , 2016. Michał Bortkiewicz, Władek Pałucki, Vivek Kruczala, Marek Cygan, and Tomasz Trzciński. Accelerating goal-conditioned RL algorithms and research. In International Conference on Learning Representations ,2025. Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Justice Carbajal, Yevgen Chebotar, Joseph Dabis, Chelsea Finn, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Karol Hausman, Alex Herzog, Jasmine Hsu, et al. Rt-1: Robotics transformer for real-world control at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.06817 , 2022. Yuri Burda, Harri Edwards, Amos Storkey, and Oleg Klimov. Exploration by random network distillation. In 

International Conference on Learning Representations , 2018. Yuri Burda, Harrison Edwards, Amos Storkey, and Oleg Klimov. Exploration by random network distillation. In Seventh International Conference on Learning Representations , 2019. Jonathan D. Chang, Wenhao Zhan, Owen Oertell, Kiantè Brantley, Dipendra Misra, Jason D. Lee, and Wen Sun. Dataset reset policy optimization for rlhf. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.08495 , 2024. Paul F Christiano, Jan Leike, Tom Brown, Miljan Martic, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei. Deep reinforcement learning from human preferences. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 30, 2017. 19 Rémi Coulom. Efficient selectivity and backup operators in monte-carlo tree search. In International conference on computers and games , pages 72–83. Springer, 2006. Stefan Depeweg, Jose-Miguel Hernandez-Lobato, Finale Doshi-Velez, and Steffen Udluft. Decomposition of uncertainty in bayesian deep learning for efficient and risk-sensitive learning. In International conference on machine learning , pages 1184–1193. PMLR, 2018. Adrien Ecoffet, Joost Huizinga, Joel Lehman, Kenneth O Stanley, and Jeff Clune. Go-explore: a new approach for hard-exploration problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.10995 , 2019. Adrien Ecoffet, Joost Huizinga, Joel Lehman, Kenneth O Stanley, and Jeff Clune. First return, then explore. 

Nature , 2021a. Adrien Ecoffet, Joost Huizinga, Joel Lehman, Kenneth O Stanley, and Jeff Clune. First return, then explore. 

Nature , 590(7847):580–586, 2021b. Lasse Espeholt, Hubert Soyer, Remi Munos, Karen Simonyan, Vlad Mnih, Tom Ward, Yotam Doron, Vlad Firoiu, Tim Harley, Iain Dunning, et al. Impala: Scalable distributed deep-rl with importance weighted actor-learner architectures. In International conference on machine learning , pages 1407–1416. PMLR, 2018. Benjamin Eysenbach, Shixiang Gu, Julian Ibarz, and Sergey Levine. Leave no trace: Learning to reset for safe and autonomous reinforcement learning, 2017. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1711.06782 .Benjamin Eysenbach, Abhishek Gupta, Julian Ibarz, and Sergey Levine. Diversity is all you need: Learning skills without a reward function, 2018. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1802.06070 .Carlos Florensa, David Held, Markus Wulfmeier, Michael Zhang, and Pieter Abbeel. Reverse curriculum generation for reinforcement learning. In Conference on Robot Learning , pages 482–495. PMLR, 2017. Dylan J. Foster, Zakaria Mhammedi, and Dhruv Rohatgi. Is a good foundation necessary for efficient reinforcement learning? the computational role of the base model in exploration, 2025. URL https: //arxiv.org/abs/2503.07453 .Justin Fu, Aviral Kumar, Ofir Nachum, George Tucker, and Sergey Levine. D4RL: Datasets for deep data-driven reinforcement learning. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.06120 , 2020. Quentin Gallouédec and Emmanuel Dellandréa. Cell-free latent go-explore. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , 2023. Zhaohan Daniel Guo, Shantanu Thakoor, Miruna Pîslar, Bernardo Avila Pires, Florent Altché, Corentin Tallec, Alaa Saade, Daniele Calandriello, Jean-Bastien Grill, Yunhao Tang, et al. Byol-explore: Exploration by bootstrapped prediction. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 35, pages 31855–31870, 2022. Abhishek Gupta, Justin Yu, Tony Z. Zhao, Vikash Kumar, Aaron Rovinsky, Kelvin Xu, Thomas Devlin, and Sergey Levine. Reset-free reinforcement learning via multi-task learning: Learning dexterous manipulation behaviors without human intervention, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2104.11203 .Danijar Hafner, Kuang-Huei Lee, Ian Fischer, and Pieter Abbeel. Deep hierarchical planning from pixels. In 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2022. Todd Hester, Matej Vecerik, Olivier Pietquin, Marc Lanctot, Tom Schaul, Bilal Piot, Dan Horgan, John Quan, Andrew Sendonaris, Ian Osband, et al. Deep q-learning from demonstrations. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence , volume 32, 2018. Rein Houthooft, Xi Chen, Yan Duan, John Schulman, Filip De Turck, and Pieter Abbeel. Vime: Variational information maximizing exploration. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 29, 2016. 20 Suning Huang, Zheyu Liu, Tianlin Chen, and Yun Li. MENTOR: Mixture-of-experts network with task-oriented perturbation for visual reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning ,2024. Daniel Jarrett, Corentin Tallec, Florent Altchè, Thomas Mesnard, Rèmi Munos, and Michal Valko. Curiosity in hindsight: Intrinsic exploration in stochastic environments. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.10515 , 2023. Steven Kapturowski, Víctor Campos, Ray Jiang, Nemanja Rakićević, Hado van Hasselt, Charles Blundell, and Adria Puigdomenech Badia. Human-level atari 200x faster. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.07550 , 2022. Alex Kendall and Yarin Gal. What uncertainties do we need in bayesian deep learning for computer vision? 

Advances in neural information processing systems , 30, 2017. Junsu Kim, Younggyo Seo, and Jinwoo Shin. Landmark-guided subgoal generation in hierarchical reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2021. Levente Kocsis and Csaba Szepesvári. Bandit based monte-carlo planning. In European conference on machine learning , pages 282–293. Springer, 2006. Balaji Lakshminarayanan, Alexander Pritzel, and Charles Blundell. Simple and scalable predictive uncertainty estimation using deep ensembles. Advances in neural information processing systems , 30, 2017. G. Li, Y. Chen, Y. Chi, Y. Gu, and Y. Wei. Sample-efficient reinforcement learning is feasible for linearly realizable MDPs with limited revisiting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.08024, 2021. , 2021. Marlos C. Machado, Marc G. Bellemare, Erik Talvitie, Joel Veness, Matthew Hausknecht, and Michael Bowling. Revisiting the arcade learning environment: Evaluation protocols and open problems for general agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:1709.06009 , 2017. Marlos C Machado, Marc G Bellemare, Erik Talvitie, Joel Veness, Matthew Hausknecht, and Michael Bowling. Revisiting the arcade learning environment: Evaluation protocols and open problems for general agents. 

Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research , 61:523–562, 2018. Augustine Mavor-Parker, Kimberly Young, Caswell Barry, and Lewis Griffin. How to stay curious while avoiding noisy tvs using aleatoric uncertainty estimation. In International Conference on Machine Learning ,pages 15220–15240. PMLR, 2022. , 2022. Zakaria Mhammedi, Dylan J Foster, and Alexander Rakhlin. The power of resets in online reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.15417 , 2024. Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G Bellemare, Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, et al. Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning. Nature , 518(7540):529–533, 2015. Volodymyr Mnih, Adria Puigdomenech Badia, Mehdi Mirza, Alex Graves, Timothy Lillicrap, Tim Harley, David Silver, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Asynchronous methods for deep reinforcement learning. In 

International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 1928–1937, 2016. Faisal Mohamed, Catherine Ji, Benjamin Eysenbach, and Glen Berseth. Temporal representations for exploration: Learning complex exploratory behavior without extrinsic rewards, 2026. URL https://arxiv. org/abs/2603.02008 .Vivek Myers, Chongyi Zheng, Anca Dragan, Sergey Levine, and Benjamin Eysenbach. Learning temporal distances: Contrastive successor features can provide a metric structure for decision-making. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , 2024. I. Osband, J. Aslanides, and A. Cassirer. Randomized prior functions for deep reinforcement learning. 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 31, 2018. 21 Ian Osband, Charles Blundell, Alexander Pritzel, and Benjamin Van Roy. Deep exploration via bootstrapped dqn. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 29, 2016. Pierre-Yves Oudeyer, Frdric Kaplan, and Verena V Hafner. Intrinsic motivation systems for autonomous mental development. IEEE transactions on evolutionary computation , 11(2):265–286, 2007. Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 35, pages 27730–27744, 2022. Deepak Pathak, Pulkit Agrawal, Alexei A Efros, and Trevor Darrell. Curiosity-driven exploration by self-supervised prediction. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 2778–2787, 2017. Deepak Pathak, Dhiraj Gandhi, and Abhinav Gupta. Self-supervised exploration via disagreement. In 

International Conference on Machine Learning , 2019. Mohammed Abu Qassem, Iyad Abuhadrous, and Hatem Elaydi. Modeling and simulation of 5 dof educational robot arm. In 2010 2nd International Conference on Advanced Computer Control , volume 5, pages 569–574. IEEE, 2010. Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Christopher D Manning, Stefano Ermon, and Chelsea Finn. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 36, 2023. Aravind Rajeswaran, Vikash Kumar, Abhishek Gupta, Giulia Vezzani, John Schulman, Emanuel Todorov, and Sergey Levine. Learning complex dexterous manipulation with deep reinforcement learning and demonstrations. In Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS) , 2018. T. Salimans and R. Chen. Learning montezuma’s revenge from a single demonstration. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.03381, 2018. , 2018a. Tim Salimans and Richard Chen. Learning Montezuma’s Revenge from a single demonstration. 

https://blog.openai.com/learning-montezumas-revenge-from-a-single-demonstration/, 2018. , 2018b. Jürgen Schmidhuber. Curious model-building control systems. In Proc. international joint conference on neural networks , 1991. John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy optimization algorithms, 2017. Ramanan Sekar, Oleh Rybkin, Kostas Daniilidis, Pieter Abbeel, Danijar Hafner, and Deepak Pathak. Planning to explore via self-supervised world models. In International Conference on Machine Learning , 2020. Pranav Shyam, Wojciech Jaśkowski, and Faustino Gomez. Model-based active exploration. In International conference on machine learning , pages 5779–5788. PMLR, 2019. , 2019. David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J Maddison, Arthur Guez, Laurent Sifre, George Van Den Driessche, Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Veda Panneershelvam, Marc Lanctot, et al. Mastering the game of go with deep neural networks and tree search. Nature , 529(7587):484–489, 2016. David Silver, Julian Schrittwieser, Karen Simonyan, Ioannis Antonoglou, Aja Huang, Arthur Guez, Thomas Hubert, Lucas Baker, Matthew Lai, Adrian Bolton, et al. Mastering the game of go without human knowledge. Nature , 550(7676):354–359, 2017. David Silver, Thomas Hubert, Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Matthew Lai, Arthur Guez, Marc Lanctot, Laurent Sifre, Dharshan Kumaran, Thore Graepel, et al. A general reinforcement learning algorithm that masters chess, shogi, and go through self-play. Science , 362(6419):1140–1144, 2018. 22 Bradly C Stadie, Sergey Levine, and Pieter Abbeel. Incentivizing exploration in reinforcement learning with deep predictive models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1507.00814 , 2015. Bradly C Stadie, Sergey Levine, and Pieter Abbeel. Incentivizing exploration in reinforcement learning with deep predictive models. International Conference on Learning Representations , 2016. , 2016. Open Ended Learning Team, Adam Stooke, Anuj Mahajan, Catarina Barros, Charlie Deck, Jakob Bauer, Jakub Sygnowski, Maja Trebacz, Max Jaderberg, Michael Mathieu, Nat McAleese, Nathalie Bradley-Schmieg, Nathaniel Wong, Nicolas Porcel, Roberta Raileanu, Steph Hughes-Fitt, Valentin Dalibard, and Wojciech Marian Czarnecki. Open-ended learning leads to generally capable agents, 2021. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.12808 .Josh Tobin, Rachel Fong, Alex Ray, Jonas Schneider, Wojciech Zaremba, and Pieter Abbeel. Domain randomization for transferring deep neural networks from simulation to the real world, 2017. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/1703.06907 .Guowei Xu, Ruijie Ge, Jiechuan Wu, Zongzhang He, Zhizhou Chen, and Chongjie Yu. DrM: Mastering visual reinforcement learning through dormant ratio minimization. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. Dong Yin, Sridhar Thiagarajan, Nevena Lazic, Nived Rajaraman, Botao Hao, and Csaba Szepesvari. Sample efficient deep reinforcement learning via local planning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.12579 , 2023a. Dong Yin, Sridhar Thiagarajan, Nevena Lazic, Nived Rajaraman, Botao Hao, and Csaba Szepesvari. Sample efficient deep reinforcement learning via local planning, 2023b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.12579 .23 A Why GWTW is Exponentially Faster: A Concrete Example 

Consider the problem of finding the deepest node in an unknown tree. DFS and BFS may, in the worst case, need to visit every node before reaching it. GWTW takes a different approach: it advances a population of particles in parallel, kills those that reach leaves, and clones survivors to maintain the population size. This pruning-and-cloning mechanism redirects all computational effort toward branches that remain alive. We illustrate this with a concrete tree where DFS and BFS both require Θ(2𝐷 ) node evaluations to find the unique deepest node, while GWTW succeeds with only O( 𝐷 log (𝐷 /𝛿 )) .

Tree construction. Let 𝐷 be a depth parameter. We construct a tree 𝑇 with a unique deepest node at depth 𝐷 + 1:

• Spine (golden path): Nodes 𝑣 0 (root), 𝑣 1, . . . , 𝑣 𝐷 +1. Each spine node 𝑣 𝑖 (0 ≤ 𝑖 ≤ 𝐷 − 1) has exactly two children: 𝑣 𝑖 +1 and a trap root 𝑡 𝑖 . Node 𝑣 𝐷 has a single child 𝑣 𝐷 +1, which is a leaf and the unique deepest node. 

• Trap subtrees: Each 𝑡 𝑖 roots a subtree where every internal node has 6 children: 2 internal nodes and 4

leaves (immediate dead ends). Trap subtrees extend down to depth 𝐷 − 1, at which point all 6 children are leaves (at depth 𝐷 ). Because each trap node spawns 2 internal children, the traps grow like binary trees. The total number of nodes in 𝑇 is Θ(2𝐷 ).

Inefficiency of DFS and BFS. Both algorithms must process the full tree volume: 

• BFS explores layer by layer. To reach depth 𝐷 + 1, it must visit all Θ(2𝐷 ) nodes at preceding levels. Cost: 

Θ(2𝐷 ).

• DFS (randomized) has a 1/2 probability of entering a trap at each spine node. Since the earliest traps contain Θ(2𝐷 ) nodes that must be exhaustively explored before backtracking, even a single wrong turn is catastrophic. Cost: Θ(2𝐷 ).

Note that independent random walks also fail: reaching 𝑣 𝐷 +1 requires taking the correct branch 𝐷 times in a row, which happens with probability 2−𝐷 .

Analysis of GWTW . GWTW maintains 𝐵 particles, all starting at 𝑣 0. At each step: (1) every particle moves to a uniformly random child; (2) particles landing on leaves die; (3) survivors are resampled with replacement to restore the population to 𝐵 .Let 𝑥 𝑖 denote the expected fraction of particles at spine node 𝑣 𝑖 . When particles at 𝑣 𝑖 step forward, both children ( 𝑣 𝑖 +1 and 𝑡 𝑖 ) are non-leaves, so all golden-path particles survive: 𝑥 𝑖 /2 land on 𝑣 𝑖 +1 and 𝑥 𝑖 /2 enter the trap. Meanwhile, trap particles each choose among 6 children ( 2 internal, 4 leaves), surviving with probability 

1/3. The total survivor fraction is: 

𝑆 𝑖 = 𝑥 𝑖 

|{z} 

> golden survivors

+ 1 − 𝑥 𝑖 

3

| {z }

> trap survivors

= 1 + 2𝑥 𝑖 

3 . (1) After resampling, the fraction on the golden path becomes: 

𝑥 𝑖 +1 = 𝑥 𝑖 /2

𝑆 𝑖 

= 3𝑥 𝑖 

2(1 + 2𝑥 𝑖 ) . (2) Starting from 𝑥 0 = 1, this recurrence produces: 1 → 1/2 → 3/8 → 9/28 → · · · , converging monotonically from above to the fixed point 𝑥 ∗ = 1/4. Since the map 𝑓 (𝑥 ) = 3𝑥  

> 2+4𝑥

is strictly increasing with 𝑓 (1/4) = 1/4,the sequence remains above 1/4 for all 𝑖 . This is the key insight: because traps kill particles at rate 2/3 per step while the golden path kills none, GWTW automatically maintains at least 25% of its population on the correct path, regardless of the exponential volume of the traps. 

Cost of GWTW . At each depth, the expected number of golden-path particles is at least 𝐵 /4. By a Chernoff bound, the probability that this count drops to zero at any single depth is at most exp (− 𝑐𝐵 ) for a 24 constant 𝑐 > 0. Applying a union bound over 𝐷 levels, the probability that GWTW ever loses the golden path is at most 𝐷 · exp (− 𝑐𝐵 ) ≤ 𝛿 whenever 𝐵 ≥ 1 

> 𝑐

ln   𝐷 𝛿 

. The total number of node evaluations is therefore: 

Cost gwtw = O( 𝐵 · 𝐷 ) = O



𝐷 log 𝐷 𝛿 



, (3) which is exponentially smaller than the Θ(2𝐷 ) cost of DFS and BFS. Note that for any fixed search strategy, adversarial trees can be constructed that force Ω(2𝐷 ) work. The fundamental reason GWTW succeeds is that parallel exploration with redistribution amplifies the probability of advancing at each depth level: in the example above, at each level GWTW only requires at least one of 𝐵 particles to follow the spine rather than enter a trap, after which cloning restores the population to 𝐵 for the next level. A single walker, by contrast, must choose the spine over a trap at all 𝐷 levels in sequence, succeeding with probability 2−𝐷 . GWTW 

converts this multiplicative success probability into an additive failure probability of 𝐷 · 𝑒 −𝑐𝐵 for a constant 

𝑐 > 0.

# B Pitfall Timer Reset 

Pitfall! features a 20-minute timer, after which the game ends. To allow for non-episodic exploration, we reset the timer at each step by directly writing to the Atari emulator’s RAM via ale.setRAM() . The timer is encoded across two RAM bytes: byte 88 stores the minutes and byte 89 stores the seconds. Because the game uses a non-standard internal encoding, we maintain hardcoded lookup tables that map standard minute and second values to the corresponding RAM integers expected by the emulator. We avoid setting the timer to exactly 20:00 or 0:00, as both boundary values trigger unintended side effects in the game state; in practice, we reset it to 19:59. This timer reset is applied only during Phase I exploration and is disabled during Phase II and evaluation. 

# C Observation Processing Details 

This appendix provides full details of the observation processing pipelines summarized in the main text. 

# C.1 Atari 

The pipeline uses standard DeepMind Acme wrappers. The environment is initialized using the NoFrameskip 

variant (or v0 with sticky actions) to obtain raw 60 Hz frames with the full 18-action space exposed. 

Temporal pooling and grayscaling. After each action repeat of 4 frames, temporal max-pooling is applied element-wise over the last 2 of the 4 frames to prevent sprite flickering artifacts. The resulting RGB image is converted to grayscale via the standard luminosity formula 𝑌 = 0.299 𝑅 + 0.587 𝐺 + 0.114 𝐵 .

Downsampling. The grayscale image is resized to the target resolution of 84 × 84 pixels. Two variants are used: 

• Standard (Montezuma, Pitfall): The grayscale frame ( 210 × 160 ) is directly resized to 84 × 84 using bilinear interpolation. 

• With spatial max-pooling (Venture): A 2 × 2 spatial max-pooling step is applied first to preserve small, bright sprites (e.g., the player dot) that would otherwise be smoothed out by bilinear interpolation. This reduces the resolution to 105 × 80 , which is then resized to 84 × 84 via bilinear interpolation. 

Normalization and frame stacking. Pixel values are cast to floating-point and scaled to [0, 1]. The 4 most recent processed frames are stacked along the channel axis, producing a final observation tensor of shape 84 × 84 × 4. For Phase II (backward learning) on Montezuma’s Revenge , a fifth frame is appended corresponding to the most recent reward observation—i.e., the frame at which the agent last received a reward (see Appendix G for details). 25 C.2 Adroit 

Pixel rendering. Rather than using the standard gym rendering interface, we attach a mujoco.MovableCamera 

to the physics state and render directly at 120 × 120 pixels in RGB. For each task, the camera pose is locked to a fixed, task-specific viewpoint: 

• hammer-v0 : Lookat = [0, −0.15 , 0.15 ], Distance = 0.7, Azimuth = −45 ◦, Elevation = −45 ◦.

• door-v0 : Lookat = [0, −0.1, 0.25 ], Distance = 0.8, Azimuth = 60 ◦, Elevation = −35 ◦.

• relocate-v0 : Lookat = [0, −0.1, 0.15 ], Distance = 0.9, Azimuth = −180 ◦, Elevation = −45 ◦.

Grayscaling, normalization, and frame stacking. The rendered RGB image is converted to grayscale via the luminosity formula. Four consecutive frames are stacked along the channel axis, producing a tensor of shape 120 × 120 × 4. Pixel values are normalized to [0, 1].

# C.3 AntMaze 

Scene modification. To make the task visually solvable, the environment scene is dynamically modified: a semi-transparent red sphere is injected at the goal coordinates via a scene callback, and the floor color is set to dark gray ( [0.2, 0.2, 0.2]) for improved contrast when textures are disabled. 

Dual camera rendering. Two views are rendered at 120 × 120 pixels using a mujoco.MovableCamera :

• Global top-down view: Locked high above the maze center (Lookat = [18 , 12 , 0], Distance = 55 , Azimuth 

= 90 ◦, Elevation = −90 ◦). Textures are disabled to provide a clean structural map of the maze layout and goal marker. 

• Third-person egocentric view: Dynamically tracks the agent’s position (Distance = 8, Azimuth = 135 ◦,Elevation = −45 ◦) with textures enabled for rich visual feedback of the ant’s limbs and surroundings. Both views are converted to grayscale and resized to 120 × 120 using Lanczos resampling. 

Frame stacking variants. During Phase I (exploration), only the global top-down view is used, yielding an observation of shape 120 × 120 × 1. During Phase II (policy distillation), the global frame is stacked with 4 historical egocentric frames, producing an observation of shape 120 × 120 × 5 (channel 0: global map; channels 1–4: temporal egocentric history). Pixel values are normalized to [0, 1].

# D MuJoCo Reward and Dead-State Extraction 

This appendix details the sparse reward and dead-state detection logic used during Phase I exploration for the MuJoCo environments. 

# D.1 AntMaze: Flip Detection 

If the ant flips over, it cannot recover, rendering the remainder of the episode useless. We detect flips using two quantities extracted from the MuJoCo physics state at every step: 1. Z-coordinate (𝑧 ): the absolute height of the ant torso, retrieved via physics.data.qpos[2] .2. Upward vector (𝑧 up ): the (2, 2) element of the torso’s 3 × 3 orientation rotation matrix 

physics.data.xmat[torso_id] ,

representing the Z-component of the torso’s local “up” vector in the world frame. The ant is flagged as flipped if either 𝑧 < 0.2 (torso near the ground) or 𝑧 up < 0 (torso upside-down). Upon detection, the particle is assigned a dead state. If the agent triggers goal_achieved on the same step as a flip, the particle is still marked as dead .26 D.2 Adroit: Sparse Contact Rewards 

For all Adroit tasks, the standard continuous rewards are replaced by a sparse reward wrapper that parses the MuJoCo contact information at every step. Contact is evaluated by extracting geometry (geom) IDs from the model and iterating through active collisions in physics.data.contact , using explicit geom whitelists to prevent false positives (e.g., the hand contacting the table rather than the target object). If the underlying environment flags goal_achieved = True , the agent receives a +1 terminal reward. The task-specific logic is: 

• hammer-v0 : Contact is checked between the 19 geoms comprising the robot hand (wrist, palm, and finger joints) and the hammer object. A reward of +1 is assigned when the hand first contacts the hammer (hammer_lifted = True ). If contact is subsequently lost, the particle is marked as dead .

• door-v0 : Contact is checked between the hand geoms and the door latch/handle geoms. A reward of +1 is assigned upon first contact ( handle_touched = True ). Loss of contact triggers a dead state. 

• relocate-v0 : Contact is checked between the ball and all geoms except a whitelist of forbidden surfaces (floor and table geoms). A reward of +1 is assigned when the ball is picked up ( ball_held = True ). If the ball touches a forbidden surface (e.g., it is dropped), the particle is marked as dead .

# E Particle Policy Training Objectives 

This appendix provides the full training objectives for the particle policies described in Section 5.3. In both settings, the environment reward is discarded entirely; all training targets are identically zero. Bootstrap masks induce diversity across particles within a group. 

# E.1 Atari (Discrete Actions) 

Each particle maintains a network 𝑓 𝜓 , parameterized by 𝜓 (Atari convolutional torso + 512-unit linear layer with ReLU), that maps state-action pairs (𝑠, 𝑎 ) to scalar predictions. To induce diversity across particles, each stored state-action pair (𝑠 𝑗 , 𝑎 𝑗 ) in the replay buffer (Section 5.1) is tagged with a binary bootstrap mask 

𝑚 𝑗 ∈ { 0, 1}, drawn independently at collection time. Given a mini-batch of 𝑛 samples B = {( 𝑠 𝑗 , 𝑎 𝑗 , 𝑚 𝑗 )} 𝑛 𝑗 =1,the loss is: 

L( 𝜓 ; B) = 1

𝑛 

> 𝑛

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =1

𝑚 𝑗 ·   𝑓 𝜓 (𝑠 𝑗 , 𝑎 𝑗 )2.

The constant zero target means that these networks carry no reward information and perform no temporal credit assignment; the bootstrap mask 𝑚 𝑗 is what causes each particle’s network to train on a different random subset of the group’s experience, producing diverse prediction landscapes and thus diverse action-selection behavior. Although the networks converge toward zero, exact numerical ties across actions are rare in practice because the different masked training subsets induce small but persistent differences in the predicted values, so the arg max still produces a deterministic, temporally consistent action for each state (see the remark in Section 5.3). 

# E.2 MuJoCo (Continuous Actions) 

Each particle maintains a Soft Actor-Critic (SAC) module. Both the actor and the twin critic use independent CNN observation encoders (standard Atari convolutional torso with orthogonal initialization). The actor network maps the flattened visual embedding through a two-layer MLP ( 128 × 128 , ReLU) to the mean and variance of a Tanh-squashed Normal distribution over actions in [− 1, 1]. The twin critic consists of two independently parameterized networks 𝑄 𝜙 1 and 𝑄 𝜙 2 ; each concatenates the visual embedding with the action vector and passes the result through a two-layer MLP ( 128 × 128 , ReLU) to produce a scalar 𝑄 -value. The training procedure mirrors the discrete case. Each sample stored in the replay buffer is tagged with a binary bootstrap mask 𝑚 𝑗 ∈ { 0, 1} to induce diversity across particles. Given a mini-batch of 𝑛 samples 

B = {( 𝑠 𝑗 , 𝑎 𝑗 , 𝑚 𝑗 )} 𝑛 𝑗 =1, the three losses are as follows. The critic loss , minimized over (𝜙 1, 𝜙 2), trains both 27 networks to output zero: 

Lcritic (𝜙 1, 𝜙 2; B) = 1

𝑛 

> 𝑛

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =1

𝑚 𝑗 ·

h 12

 𝑄 𝜙 1 (𝑠 𝑗 , 𝑎 𝑗 )2 + 12

 𝑄 𝜙 2 (𝑠 𝑗 , 𝑎 𝑗 )2i

.

The actor loss , minimized over 𝜃 , is entropy-regularized. For each state 𝑠 𝑗 in the batch, an action 𝑎 ′ 

> 𝑗

∼ 𝜋 𝜃 (· | 𝑠 𝑗 )

is sampled from the current policy, and 

Lactor (𝜃 ; B) = 1

𝑛 

> 𝑛

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =1

𝑚 𝑗 · 𝛼 log 𝜋 𝜃 (𝑎 ′ 

> 𝑗

| 𝑠 𝑗 ) − 𝑄 min (𝑠 𝑗 , 𝑎 ′ 

> 𝑗

),

where 𝑄 min (𝑠, 𝑎 ) = min  𝑄 𝜙 1 (𝑠, 𝑎 ), 𝑄 𝜙 2 (𝑠, 𝑎 ). The temperature loss , minimized over scalar 𝛼 > 0, adjusts the entropy weight automatically: 

Ltemp (𝛼 ; B) = 1

𝑛 

> 𝑛

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =1

−𝛼 ·  log 𝜋 𝜃 (𝑎 ′ 

> 𝑗

| 𝑠 𝑗 ) + 𝐻 target 

 ,

where 𝐻 target = − dim (A) , i.e., the negative dimensionality of the action space. 

# F Distributed Implementation Details 

This appendix provides a detailed description of the distributed architecture used to scale GowU to high-dimensional environments. The system decouples environment simulation, population management, and parameter optimization, enabling high-throughput exploration. It consists of three main logical components communicating asynchronously: a central coordinator , a pool of distributed rollout workers , and asynchronous learning nodes .

# F.1 Central Coordinator 

The central coordinator acts as the orchestrator of the search. It manages the global state of the population and coordinates the branches of exploration. Its responsibilities are as follows: 

Population state management. The coordinator tracks the status of all 𝑀 × 𝑁 particles, including each particle’s current environment checkpoint, cumulative reward, and survival status ( alive or dead , as defined in Section 3). 

State-lineage tree maintenance. The coordinator hosts the global state-lineage tree (Section 4.1) and is responsible for expanding it with new nodes as workers report completed rollouts. 

The Go-With-The-Winner loop. The coordinator drives the top-level iterations of the GWTW loop (Algorithm 2). Each iteration proceeds in three phases: 1. Dispatch: The coordinator issues remote procedure calls (RPCs) to trigger rollouts on the worker pool, providing each worker with the starting checkpoint, the group index, and the ensemble member index. The workers independently fetch the latest policy weights from the learning nodes before beginning their rollouts. 2. Aggregate: It waits for all parallel rollouts to complete and collects the resulting endpoints, trajectories, and rewards. 3. Sync and prune: The coordinator applies the winner-selection and pruning logic (Section 4.2) and instructs the workers to overwrite failing particles with clones of the winners. 

# F.2 Distributed Rollout Workers 

The workers are parallel execution nodes that drive environment interactions. They act as stateless clients that execute directives issued by the coordinator. 28 State restoration. Each worker receives a compact environment snapshot (checkpoint) from the global lineage tree and restores the local simulator to that exact state before starting a rollout. 

Ensemble weight fetching. To initialize a rollout, the worker fetches the latest policy parameters from the learning node using two indices provided by the coordinator: 

• Group index 𝑔 ∈ { 1, . . . , 𝑀 }: identifies the parameter batch belonging to the worker’s group. 

• Ensemble member index idx ∈ { 0, . . . , 𝑁 − 1}: indexes into the group’s ensemble to select a single set of network weights, where 𝑁 is the number of particles (and ensemble members) per group. The coordinator computes the ensemble member index deterministically from the particle’s global index 

𝑖 ∈ { 0, . . . , 𝑁 𝑀 − 1} via idx = 𝑖 mod 𝑁 and passes it directly to the worker during dispatch. 

Rollout execution. The worker steps through the environment for the prescribed number of steps, sampling actions from the policy parameterized by the fetched weights. 

Back-reporting. Upon completing the rollout, the worker transmits the endpoint environment checkpoint and cumulative reward back to the coordinator. The coordinator uses these to create a new node in the state-lineage tree (Section 4.1), which stores only the endpoint checkpoint, cumulative reward, and a parent pointer. 

# F.3 Asynchronous Learning Nodes 

To keep exploration dynamic, the uncertainty estimator and particle policy weights must update continuously as new states are discovered. 

Distributed experience replay. Workers stream their state-action data into per-group replay buffers (Section 5.1). 

Asynchronous updates. Learning nodes consume data from these buffers continuously, running gradient-descent steps to update the uncertainty estimator (Section 5.2) and the particle policies (Section 5.3). The uncertainty estimator is trained on data aggregated from all 𝑀 groups, while each group’s policy ensemble is trained on group-specific data only. 

Parameter broadcasting. Updated weights are periodically pushed to a parameter server from which the coordinator and workers fetch the latest parameters to guide subsequent rollouts. 

# G Implementation Details for the Backward Algorithm 

Here, we describe our implementation of the backward algorithm. We first explain how demonstrations are decomposed into segments and then detail the curriculum learning strategy applied to each segment. Finally, we provide the specific configuration parameters and hyperparameters used in our experiments. 

# G.1 Overview and segmentation 

Our approach builds on the backward learning algorithm of Salimans and Chen. (2018a), as also used in the robustification phase of Go-Explore (Ecoffet et al., 2021b), and extends it with several modifications. The agent learns to solve the task by starting from states near the end of a demonstration and gradually moving the starting point backwards. To break a single long backward trajectory into smaller, more manageable chunks— making training faster and more stable—we decompose each demonstration trajectory 𝜏 = {𝑠 0, 𝑎 0, 𝑟 0, . . . , 𝑠 𝑇 }

into at most 𝐾 max segments delineated by reward events. Concretely, we first identify all timesteps at which the agent receives a non-zero reward. If there are more such timesteps than 𝐾 max , we evenly downsample them to obtain exactly 𝐾 max boundary points. Let 𝑇 𝑘 denote the 𝑘 -th selected boundary; segment 𝑘 then covers the portion of the trajectory culminating at 𝑇 𝑘 . For Atari, we set 𝐾 max = 10 ; for the MuJoCo tasks (Adroit and AntMaze), we set 𝐾 max = 1, treating the entire demonstration as a single segment where the starting state is progressively moved back toward the initial state. Our implementation supports training on multiple demonstrations simultaneously: each demonstration is segmented independently. Importantly, the resulting segments are not simply aggregated into a flat pool; the system tracks the ordering of segments and 29 which demonstration each segment originates from, since each segment’s curriculum window is allowed to extend backward beyond the segment’s own start boundary. 

Distributed architecture. The system uses a distributed actor-learner architecture. A centralized 

curriculum server maintains the global curriculum state—tracking the current start index, success rates, and window sizes for every segment—and serves starting states to the actors. Multiple distributed actors 

concurrently fetch start states from the curriculum server, execute episodes, and stream trajectories to a centralized learner , which continuously updates the PPO policy weights. Background evaluators run asynchronously, periodically fetching the latest weights to assess performance (see Section G.6). This architecture allows the algorithm to learn different stages of the task in parallel, scaling efficiently with the number of actors. 

# G.2 Curriculum strategy 

For a chosen segment ending at 𝑇 end , the curriculum maintains a current start index 𝑡 curr (initially set to 

𝑇 end ) and a variable window size Δ. This index represents the latest point in the trajectory from which the agent is currently learning to reach the segment’s goal. The curriculum dynamically adjusts both the start position and the window size based on the agent’s performance. 

State sampling. At the beginning of an episode, a start index 𝑡 start is sampled uniformly from the interval 

[𝑡 curr − Δ, 𝑡 curr ]. The environment is reset to the state 𝑠 𝑡 start from the demonstration. 

Success criteria. An episode is considered successful if the agent achieves a return 𝑅 agent comparable to the return of the demonstration segment from 𝑡 start to 𝑇 end , denoted as 𝑅 demo (𝑡 start ). Success is strictly defined as: 

𝑅 agent ≥ 𝑅 demo (𝑡 start ) − 𝜀 tol 

where 𝜀 tol is a tolerance parameter (see Table 7 for environment-specific values). An episode is terminated early if the number of steps exceeds 𝜇 · 𝐿 + 𝑏 , where 𝐿 is an exponential moving average (with smoothing factor 𝛼 = 0.9) of successful rollout lengths, 𝜇 = 2.0 is a multiplier, and 𝑏 is a fixed buffer ( 𝑏 = 500 by default; 

𝑏 = 100 for Adroit). For Atari, training episodes are additionally terminated early upon loss of life. 

Curriculum progression. The curriculum tracks the success rate 𝑆 over a buffer of the most recent 𝑁 update 

rollouts. Two distinct success thresholds govern progression: 

• Regression (moving backwards): If 𝑆 ≥ 𝑆 req (default 0.2), the window moves backward to include earlier states. The current start index is updated as 𝑡 curr ← max (0, 𝑡 curr − 𝛿 back ), where the step size 

𝛿 back is sampled uniformly from [𝛼 dec · Δ, 𝛽 dec · Δ]. Here, 𝛼 dec and 𝛽 dec are decrease multipliers that control the step size range (see Table 7). This stochastic step size prevents the curriculum from getting stuck in local cycles. Note that the lower bound is the absolute beginning of the demonstration (the initial state), not the beginning of the segment; this means the curriculum window for a given segment can extend well beyond the segment’s own start boundary, and each segment’s curriculum eventually requires the agent to achieve the segment’s reward target starting from the very beginning of the demonstration. 

• Simplification (moving forwards): If 𝑆 < 𝑆 req , the task is deemed too difficult, and the window moves forward. The update is 𝑡 curr ← min (𝑇 end , 𝑡 curr + 𝛿 fwd ), where the step size 𝛿 fwd is sampled uniformly from [𝛼 inc · Δ, 𝛽 inc · Δ], with 𝛼 inc and 𝛽 inc being the increase multipliers. 

• Completion criterion: When 𝑡 curr reaches step 0 (the beginning of the demonstration), a stricter threshold 𝑆 req,begin = 0.95 must be met before the segment is considered solved. This ensures the agent can reliably execute the full trajectory from the very start of the demonstration to the segment’s reward boundary. 

# G.3 Environment-specific configurations 

The backward curriculum is configured differently across environment families: 30 Atari (Montezuma’s Revenge, Pitfall!, Venture). Demonstrations are decomposed into up to 𝐾 max = 10 

segments. The window size is Δ = 25 , and the decrease/increase multipliers are (𝛼 dec , 𝛽 dec ) = (0.25 , 0.75 )

and (𝛼 inc , 𝛽 inc ) = (0.5, 1.0), respectively. For Montezuma’s Revenge and Venture , reward clipping is applied (bounding cumulative targets to [− 1, 1]) with a strict tolerance 𝜀 tol = 0. For Pitfall! , rewards are scaled by 0.001 (without clipping) and the tolerance is relaxed to 𝜀 tol = 1500 to accommodate the game’s scoring structure, where the agent can lose points. For Montezuma’s Revenge , the agent’s observations include the frame at which the last reward was received, providing context when the same room appears multiple times in a demonstration. Additionally, after successfully achieving the segment’s reward target, the agent is allowed to continue playing for a random number of extra frames (up to ∼ 𝑒 7 ≈ 1096 ); this provides additional exploration beyond the target state. 

Adroit (door, hammer, relocate). The entire demonstration is treated as a single segment ( 𝐾 max = 1). The window size is reduced to Δ = 3, and all multipliers are set deterministically to 1/3, removing the stochastic step-size variation. Intermediate contact rewards from Phase I are discarded; only task-completion events are used as reward signals. During the backward curriculum, the goal configuration (i.e., the randomized target location and object placement) is held fixed to the one used during exploration. Once the curriculum reaches the initial state and the completion criterion is satisfied (i.e., success rate 𝑆 ≥ 𝑆 req,begin = 0.95 ), the environment transitions to performing clean resets (i.e., a true env.reset() , which results in randomized goal configurations across episodes). This trains the policy to generalize across randomized target locations and object placements. The agent continues training under this regime for an additional 10 M steps. The 

door task uses longer episode limits than the other Adroit tasks ( 1,000 vs. 250 training steps; 500 vs. 250 

evaluation steps) due to the longer horizon required to solve the task. 

AntMaze. As with Adroit, the demonstration is treated as a single segment ( 𝐾 max = 1). The window size is Δ = 25 . An action repeat of 4 is applied. Once the curriculum reaches step 0, clean environment resets are used as in Adroit, and the agent continues training for an additional 10 M steps. The PPO batch size is reduced from 128 to 64 .

# G.4 Agent architecture 

We use Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) as the underlying reinforcement learning algorithm. The policy and value functions use separate encoders based on the IMPALA ResNet architecture (Espeholt et al., 2018), each followed by fully connected layers. For Atari, each encoder feeds into a dense layer of size 1024 , followed by policy and value heads of size 512 . For Adroit and AntMaze, the architecture is scaled down: the dense layer is 512 , and the policy and value heads are 256 each. The encoder input varies by environment; see Appendix C for details on the observation processing pipeline for each environment family. 

# G.5 Hyperparameters and configuration 

For each demonstration, we run on 5 random seeds. Consistent with Go-Explore , we use reward clipping on Montezuma’s Revenge and Venture , and reward scaling on Pitfall! .

# G.6 Evaluation 

A background evaluator runs concurrently with training: it periodically fetches the latest policy weights from the learner and executes evaluation rollouts using the deterministic (mode) version of the policy. During training, we run 10 rollouts per evaluation for Atari and 30 for MuJoCo. Throughout the training run, we record the 100 best-performing checkpoints based on these periodic evaluations. 

Training budget. For Atari, we train for 15 –20 B environment frames. For MuJoCo, training continues until all segments have been solved with the 95% completion threshold ( 𝑆 req,begin ). 

Final evaluation. After training is complete, we perform a dedicated evaluation-only pass over the 100 

recorded checkpoints. Each checkpoint is evaluated on 500 rollouts, and the best-performing checkpoint is selected as the final policy. 31 Table 6: PPO Hyperparameters (defaults; see Section G.3 for environment-specific overrides). Parameter Value Optimizer Adam Learning Rate 1 × 10 −4

Discount Factor ( 𝛾 ) 0.999 GAE Lambda ( 𝜆 ) 0.95 Unroll Length 128 Batch Size 128 (64 for AntMaze) Num Epochs 1Num Minibatches 8Entropy Cost 1 × 10 −3

Value Cost 0.5 PPO Clipping ( 𝜀 ) 0.1 Max Gradient Norm 0.5 Shared Dense Layer 1024 (512 for Adroit/AntMaze) Policy/Value Head 512 (256 for Adroit/AntMaze) Table 7: Backward Algorithm Configuration (defaults; see Section G.3 for environment-specific overrides). Parameter Value Required Success Rate ( 𝑆 req ) 0.2 Completion Threshold ( 𝑆 req,begin ) 0.95 Start delta window ( Δ) 25 (3 for Adroit) Min Rollouts for Update ( 𝑁 update ) 32 Decrease Multipliers ( 𝛼 dec , 𝛽 dec ) 0.25, 0.75 ( 13 , 13 for Adroit) Increase Multipliers ( 𝛼 inc , 𝛽 inc ) 0.5, 1.0 ( 13 , 13 for Adroit) Failure Reward Tolerance ( 𝜀 tol ) 0 (Montezuma) 1500 (Pitfall) EMA Smoothing Factor ( 𝛼 ) 0.9 Early Termination Multiplier ( 𝜇 ) 2.0 Rollout Length Buffer ( 𝑏 ) 500 (100 for Adroit) 

Evaluation heuristics. To ensure evaluation integrity, we apply several environment-specific heuristics: 

• Treasure room bug (Montezuma’s Revenge): A well-known exploit in Montezuma’s Revenge allows the agent to remain in a treasure room and collect 1,000 -point rewards indefinitely by repeating a specific action sequence, without progressing to the next level. To prevent this from inflating evaluation scores, the evaluator monitors for consecutive rewards of exactly 1,000 points. If 30 or more such consecutive rewards are detected, the rollout is immediately discarded. 

• Loitering prevention (Atari): During extended evaluations, if the agent exceeds the normal episode length and fails to collect any reward for 10 ,000 consecutive steps, the episode is terminated early. This prevents the agent from wandering indefinitely in safe but unproductive states. 

• Task completion (Adroit/AntMaze): The evaluation rollout is terminated as soon as the agent reaches the goal (e.g., completing the manipulation objective or arriving at the target location). 

# H Montezuma’s Revenge Middle Room Bug 

During exploration, we discovered a previously undocumented bug in Montezuma’s Revenge that occurs in the middle room of each level (the room containing a torch and a rolling skull). Figure 7 illustrates the bug sequence frame by frame: the agent, positioned on the rope on the right-hand side of the room (Frame −4), 32 jumps to the left and progressively approaches the platform where the rolling skull patrols (Frames −3

through −1), eventually making contact with the platform (Frame 0). If the agent is carrying a key at the time of contact, the key is consumed and a reward is collected. Since the key in the first room respawns periodically after a sufficient delay (Salimans and Chen., 2018b), the agent can return, re-acquire it, and repeat the process indefinitely, creating an infinite reward loop that traps the agent in the same level and prevents further exploration.          

> Frame −4Frame −3Frame −2Frame −1Frame 0

Figure 7: Frame-by-frame illustration of the middle room bug in Montezuma’s Revenge . The agent starts on the rope (Frame −4), jumps left, and hits the skull platform (Frame 0), losing a key and collecting an unintended reward. To prevent the algorithm from exploiting this glitch, we employ a two-step visual detection heuristic that activates whenever a positive reward is registered. 

Step 1: Location verification. We first determine whether the agent is currently in the middle room. A fixed 20 × 20 spatial crop of the current frame is extracted from a region that uniquely identifies this room. The crop is compared against a pre-recorded set of reference crops from the middle room across different game levels using the L2 norm (Euclidean distance). If the pixel-wise distance is below a small threshold, the agent is confirmed to be in the middle room. 

Step 2: Action verification. If the location check passes, we verify whether the agent has just performed the bugged action (jumping off the rope). We inspect the agent’s last four frames (as shown in Figure 7) and isolate a bounding box covering the area where the rope sequence takes place. The maximum pixel-wise difference between consecutive frames in this region is computed; if it exceeds a threshold, it indicates a sudden burst of movement consistent with the visual signature of the agent jumping off the rope. 

Intervention. If a positive reward is received while both visual conditions are simultaneously satisfied, the reward is flagged as an exploit and the particle is immediately marked as dead . This ensures the buggy particle will never be selected as a winner; instead, at the next GowU redistribution step, it will be replaced by a clone of the current winner—a non-buggy particle—and exploration resumes from a valid state. 33